arXiv:2603.04444v2 [cs.NI] 6 Mar 2026 vLLM Semantic Router: Signal Driven Decision Routing for Mixture-of-Modality Models Xunzhuo Liu, Huamin Chen, Samzong Lu, Yossi Ovadia, Guohong Wen, Hao Wu, Zhengda Tan, Jintao Zhang, Senan Zedan, Yehudit Kerido, Liav Weiss, Haichen Zhang, Bishen Yu, Asaad Balum, Noa Limoy, Abdallah Samara, Baofa Fan, Brent Salisbury, Ryan Cook, Zhijie Wang, Qiping Pan, Rehan Khan, Avishek Goswami, Houston H. Zhang, Shuyi Wang, Ziang Tang, Fang Han, Zohaib Hassan, Jianqiao Zheng, Avinash Changrani Abstract As large language models (LLMs) diversify across modalities, capabilities, and cost profiles, the problem of intelligent request routingčselecting the right model for each query at inference timečhas become a critical systems challenge. We present vLLM Semantic Router, a signal-driven decision routing framework for Mixture-of-Modality (MoM) model deployments. The architecture follows two complementary Shannon-inspired views. In the information-theoretic regime, signal extraction reduces the entropy of ęwhich model?ė by distilling routing-relevant information from raw queries. In the Boolean-algebraic regime, the decision engine composes functionally complete routing policies from signal conditions. The central innovation is composable signal orchestration: thirteen het.erogeneous signal typesčspanning sub-millisecond heuristics and neural classifiers for semantics, safety, and modalityčare composed through con.figurable Boolean decision rules into deployment-specific routing policies, so that fundamentally different scenarios (multi-cloud enterprise, privacy-regulated, cost-optimized) are expressed as different configurations over the same architecture. Matched decisions drive semantic model routing via thirteen selection algo.rithms, while per-decision plugin chains enforce safety constraints including a three-stage HaluGate hallucination detection pipeline and a lightweight episodic memory system with ReflectionGate for personalized multi-turn context. A typed neural-symbolic DSL specifies these routing policies and compiles them to multiple deployment targets, enabling configuration-first adaptation without code changes. Together, these components show that composable signal orchestration enables a single framework to serve diverse deployment scenarios with differentiated cost, privacy, and safety policies. 1 Introduction The landscape of large language models has fragmented along multiple axes: modality (text, code, vision, diffusion), scale (1B to 1T+ parameters), cost (10. variation in per-token pricing), and specialization (general-purpose vs. domain-specific fine-tuning). Orga.nizations increasingly operate heterogeneous model fleetsčlocal vLLM instances alongside cloud endpoints from OpenAI, Anthropic, Azure, Bedrock, Gemini, and Vertex AIčeach with different capabilities, pricing, and compliance characteristics. This heterogeneity cre.ates a fundamental inference-time optimization problem: given a user query, a fleet of diverse models, and deployment-specific constraints, which model should serve it, and what safety and privacy policies should apply? Viewed through the lens of information theory Shannon (1948), routing is an uncertainty-reduction problem. Before any analysis, routing entropy is maximal: H(M | rraw) ┼ log2 K Corresponding repository: GitHub repository bits for K candidate modelsčevery model is equally plausible. Each signal extracted from the request reduces this uncertainty. This viewpoint suggests a natural two-layer decomposition (Figure 1). Under this decom.position, the objective is to collapse H(M | S(r)) to near zero so the decision engine can make a deterministic, high-confidence routing choice (Figure 2). H(M | signals observed) Information Theory regime Boolean Algebra regime Figure 1: Structural correspondence between Shannonšs communication system Shannon (1948) and VSRšs routing pipeline. The dotted line marks the boundary between the information-theoretic regime (signal extraction maximizes mutual information with the rout.ing outcome) and the Boolean-algebraic regime (the decision engine synthesizes routing poli.cies from signal conditions via {., ., ┬} Shannon (1938)). In the first layer, signal extraction operates in the probabilistic regime of Shannonšs Math.ematical Theory of Communication; in the second, decision evaluation operates in the al.gebraic regime of Shannonšs switching-circuit algebra Shannon (1938). The signal vector s is the interface between these regimes: continuous probabilistic inference below, discrete symbolic logic above. In modern ML terms, the extraction layer behaves like a hybrid em.bedding stage (Section 3.8), while the priority-ordered decision engine behaves like a sym.bolic Mixture-of-Experts gate with deterministic early exit (Section 4.8). We also interpret priority blocks as layered entropy folding (Section 4.9). Together these components form a programmable neural-symbolic inference engine (Transformer-like control structure, but not equivalent hidden-state dynamics), which we connect to agent-based policy synthesis (Section 6.8). log2 K ┼ 0 Raw +keyword +domain +complexity Decision query +language +embedding .(s) Figure 2: Entropy collapse during signal extraction (illustrative). Each additional signal reduces the routing uncertainty H(M |ß ) from the uniform prior log2 K bits until the decision formula .(s) yields a near-deterministic model selection. Bar heights are schematic rather than empirical measurements. This problem is more nuanced than binary difficulty routing. A production routing system must simultaneously consider: ź Multi-dimensional signals: Query domain, modality, complexity, language, user iden.tity, and real-time performance metrics all inform the optimal routing decision. ź Privacy and safety: Prompt injection, PII leakage, and hallucinated responses must be detected and mitigatedčoften with different policies for different query types and user roles. ź Cost-effective model selection: Algorithms must balance response quality against inference cost and latency, selecting from a heterogeneous pool of local and cloud-hosted models. ź Deployment diversity: The same routing framework must serve a privacy-regulated healthcare deployment (strict PII filtering, on-premise models only), a cost-optimized developer tool (aggressive caching, cheapest model first), and a multi-cloud enterprise (failover across providers)čthrough configuration, not code changes. ź Multi-turn statefulness: Routing decisions must be consistent across conversation turns, requiring stateful session management and context preservation. Prior work on LLM routing has made significant progress on individual aspects. RouteLLM Ong et al. (2024) trains classifiers to route between two models based on query difficulty. RouterDC Chen et al. (2024) learns query-model embeddings via dual contrastive learning. AutoMix Aggarwal et al. (2023) formulates cascading as a POMDP. However, these approaches address model selection in isolation, without integrating signal extrac.tion, safety enforcement, multi-provider backend management, or plugin extensibility into a unified framework. 1.1 Contributions We present vLLM Semantic Router, a signal-driven decision routing system whose central innovation is composable signal orchestration: heterogeneous signals are extracted, composed through Boolean rules into deployment-specific decisions, and executed through per-decision plugin chainsčenabling a single architecture to serve diverse deployment sce.narios. Our contributions are: 1. Composable Signal-Decision-Plugin Architecture (Sections 2 to 5): A three-layer architecture where thirteen signal types are composed through Boolean decision rules into deployment-specific routing policies, with per-decision plugin chains for safety, caching, and augmentation. Different deployment scenarios (privacy-regulated, cost-optimized, multi-cloud) are expressed as different configurations over the same architecture. 2. Semantic Model Routing with Cost-Aware Selection (Section 10): A unified framework integrating thirteen model selection algorithmsčrating-based, contrastive, cascading, classical ML, reinforcement learning, and latency-awarečthat analyze request semantics to select the most cost-effective model while respecting per-decision privacy and safety constraints. 3. HaluGate: Gated Hallucination Detection (Section 8): A three-stage pipelineč sentinel gating, token-level detection, NLI-based explanationčthat avoids unnecessary verification on non-factual queries while providing span-level diagnostics when hallucina.tion is detected. 4. Multi-Provider and Multi-Endpoint Routing (Section 12): Native support for rout.ing across heterogeneous backends (vLLM, OpenAI, Anthropic, Azure, Bedrock, Gemini, Vertex AI) with provider-specific protocol translation, a pluggable authorization factory for diverse auth mechanisms, weighted multi-endpoint load distribution, and full OpenAI Responses API support for stateful multi-turn conversations. 5. LoRA-Based Multi-Task Classification (Sections 9 and 11): A memory-efficient architecture using Low-Rank Adaptation that serves n classification tasks from a single base model with lightweight adapter heads, reducing aggregate model memory from n full copies to one base plus negligible adapter overhead. 6. Episodic Conversation Memory with ReflectionGate (Section 13): A lightweight memory system that stores raw conversational turns as episodic chunks (filtered by an entropy gate and capped at 16KB) rather than relying on LLM-based fact extraction, eliminating inference overhead at write time. At retrieval time, a multi-stage Reflection-Gate pipelinečsafety block-pattern filtering, recency decay, Jaccard deduplication, and budget cappingčrefines retrieved chunks before injection as a separate context message, enabling personalized multi-turn routing without coupling memory quality to an external model. 7. Programmable Neural-Symbolic Configuration Language (Section 6): A typed configuration language that serves as the instruction set of the routing inference engine, with a formal grammar parsed into a Boolean expression AST, three-level validation (syntax, reference, constraint), multi-target compilation (flat YAML, Kubernetes CRDs, Helm charts), and round-trip decompilation. We formalize the system as a programmable neural-symbolic inference enginečneural signal extraction as a hybrid embedding layer, symbolic decision evaluation as Mixture-of-Experts gatingčand show that the languagešs functional completeness enables LLM-based coding agents to synthesize routing policies from natural-language specifications. 1.2 Paper Organization Section 2 presents the system architecture and composable orchestration model. Sections 3 and 4 formalize the signal extraction and decision evaluation layers. Sections 5, 7 and 8 describe the plugin framework and safety subsystems. Sections 9 and 11 detail the LoRA.based classification architecture and multi-runtime inference design. Section 10 surveys the semantic model selection algorithms. Section 12 describes the multi-provider request pro.cessing pipeline. Sections 13 to 15 cover memory, observability, and deployment. Section 16 presents evaluation results. Section 6 specifies the programmable configuration language and develops the neural-symbolic inference engine perspective. Section 17 discusses related work, and Section 18 concludes. 2 System Architecture We formalize the routing problem and present the three-layer architecture that decomposes it into composable signal extraction, decision evaluation, and plugin executiončenabling a single framework to serve diverse deployment scenarios through configuration. 2.1 Problem Formulation Let M = {m1,...,mK } denote a set of K available model backends, each characterized by capability profile, cost, and latency. Each backend may be served by a different provider pk .P (e.g., local vLLM, OpenAI, Anthropic, Azure, Bedrock, Gemini), with provider-specific API protocols and authentication mechanisms. A deployment may expose multiple endpoints E = {e1,...,eL} with weighted load distribution across backends. Given an incoming request r (consisting of a message sequence, metadata, user identity, and headers), the routing problem is to: .1. Select a model m .M that maximizes response quality while respecting cost and latency constraints; 2. Apply deployment-specific safety and privacy transformations T (r) before and after model invocation; 3. Route through the correct provider endpoint with appropriate authentication. .NaĢve approaches either fix m statically or route based on a single dimension (e.g., esti.mated difficulty). We argue that production routing requires reasoning over multiple or.thogonal signal dimensions simultaneously, with different policies (safety thresholds, caching Figure 3: Three-layer architecture with closed-loop feedback. A deployment configuration . selects which signals, decisions, and plugins are active. Layer 1 extracts a signal vector s from the request. Layer 2 evaluates Boolean decision formulas to select d. . Layer 3 executes the per-decision plugin chain, selects a model from d.šs candidate set, and routes to the provider endpoint. Response-side signals feed back to enable adaptive routing. strategies, prompt augmentation, model pools) for different routing outcomesčand that these policies must be composable to support diverse deployment scenarios without archi.tectural changes. 2.2 Composable Signal Orchestration The key architectural innovation is that the same signal extraction, decision evaluation, and plugin execution machinery can be composed differently for different deployment scenarios: Definition 1 (Programmable Neural-Symbolic Configuration Language). A deployment configuration .=(S., D., .., E.) specifies which signal types S. .S are active, what decisions D. are evaluated, which plugin chains .. are attached, and which endpoints E. are available. Example configurations: ź Privacy-regulated (healthcare): Active signals include domain, authz, and language. Deci.sions route sensitive queries to on-premise models only. Plugins enforce strict PII redac.tion with no caching. ź Cost-optimized (developer tool): Active signals include complexity, embedding, and key.word. Decisions cascade from cheap to expensive models. Plugins enable aggressive semantic caching. ź Multi-cloud enterprise: Active signals include domain, modality, and authz. Decisions distribute across multiple provider endpoints using latency-aware model selection with weighted failover. Plugins inject provider-specific auth headers. All three scenarios use the same architecture; only . differs. This composability is the central design contribution. 2.3 Three-Layer Architecture The architecture decomposes routing into three layers, each with a well-defined interface (Figure 3): Input Layer: Signal Extraction. The signal layer maps a request r to a structured signal result s, consisting of binary match indicators and real-valued confidences for each configured rule across thirteen signal types. Heuristic signals (keyword, language, context length, authorization) complete in sub-millisecond time. ML-based signals (embedding similarity, domain classification, factual grounding, modality detection, complexity, preference, user feedback, jailbreak detection, PII detection) require neural inference at 10ą120ms. Signals are evaluated in parallel, and only signal types referenced by at least one active decision are computedča critical optimization for deployment configurations that use a subset of available signals. Hidden Layers: Decision Blocks. The decision layer takes the signal result s and evaluates a set of decisions D = {d1,...,dM }, each defined as a Boolean formula over signal conditions. The engine selects the best-matching decision d. using either priority-based or confidence-weighted ranking. Each decision carries its own model candidate set Md. .M, enabling deployment-specific model pools (e.g., a privacy decision restricts candidates to on-premise models). Projection Layer: Plugin Chain. Each decision d. carries a per-decision plugin config.uration that defines: (a) pre-routing plugins (fast response for safety enforcement, semantic caching, RAG context injection, modality routing, memory retrieval, system prompt aug.mentation, header mutation for provider auth), executed before model invocation; (b) a semantic model selection algorithm applied to d.šs candidate model set Md. to find the best model cost-effectively; (c) post-routing plugins (hallucination detection, cache updates), executed on the model response. 2.4 Design Principles Four principles guide the architecture: Composability. Complex routing policies are expressed as compositions of simple primi.tives: Boolean combinations of signal conditions form decisions; sequences of typed plugins form execution chains; deployment scenarios are expressed as configuration profiles. This avoids monolithic routing logic and enables the same system to serve fundamentally different deployment requirements. Orthogonality. Signals, decisions, and plugins are independent modules with a uniform interface boundary. New signal types can be added by implementing a single evaluation functiončthe decision engine references signals solely by type and rule name, requiring no modification. Likewise, new plugins and providers are registered independently. The cur.rent thirteen signal types are the built-in set; the framework is designed to be extended with domain-specific signals as deployment requirements evolve. This strict decoupling has a the.oretical antecedent in Shannonšs source-channel separation theorem Shannon (1948): just as a communication system can be decomposed into a source encoder (which compresses the message to its informational essence) and a channel encoder (which adds structure for reli.able transmission)čeach optimized independently without loss of optimalityčthe routing system decomposes into a signal extraction layer (which distills routing-relevant information from the raw request) and a decision layer (which synthesizes a routing policy from the ex.tracted signals). The signal vector s is the interface between these independently optimizable stages, analogous to the compressed source representation at the encoderąchannel boundary. This separation also mirrors the architecture of Mixture-of-Experts models Shazeer et al. (2017), where the gating network (signal extraction) and expert modules (model backends) are designed independentlyčthough our gating is symbolic rather than neural, enabling formal verification and compositional editing (Section 4.8). Closed-loop adaptivity. The bidirectional signal flow described in Section 3 enables the architecture to operate as a closed-loop control system üstrÜm & Murray (2008). In control-theoretic terms, the signalądecisionąplugin pipeline is the plant, response-side signals (hallucination detection, user feedback, latency measurements) are the sensors, and a policy adjustment mechanism is the controller that updates decision parameters .(t) (priorities, model weights) based on observed response quality: .  .(t+1) = .(t) . (r; .(t))+ . .. E Q r, m (1) where Q(r, m .) is a response quality metric and . is a learning rate. This formulation con.nects to the contextual bandit framework Li et al. (2010): the signal vector S(r) serves as the context, model selection is the action, and response quality is the reward. Standard regret bounds from online learning theory Shalev-Shwartz (2012) guarantee that the cumu.lative routing quality of such an adaptive policy converges to that of the best fixed policy in ├ hindsight at a rate of O( T ), providing formal performance guarantees for self-improving routing. Per-decision scoping. Safety thresholds, caching policies, model candidates, and auth mechanisms are scoped to individual decisions rather than applied globally. A coding-focused decision can omit PII signal conditions while a customer-support decision enforces strict PII filtering via signal-matched fast responsečusing the same system configuration. Provider abstraction. The architecture abstracts over provider-specific protocols, au.thentication, and endpoint topologies. Multi-endpoint routing with weighted distribution and failover is handled at the infrastructure layer, enabling decisions to reference models by capability rather than by provider-specific endpoint. 3 Signal Extraction Layer The signal extraction layer maps an incoming request r to a structured signal result that characterizes the request along thirteen orthogonal dimensions. Figure 4 provides an overview of the signal taxonomy and evaluation flow. We formalize the signal model and describe the extraction algorithms. 3.1 Signal Model Definition 2 (Signal Rule). A signal rule . =(., n, f) consists of a signal type . .T ,a rule name n, and an evaluation function f : R.{0, 1}. [0, 1] that maps a request to a binary match indicator and a confidence score. Definition 3 (Signal Result). Given a rule set R = {.1,...,.N }, the signal result for request r is: .  S(r)= .i, 1[fi(r)],ci(r) | .i .R (2) where 1[fi(r)] is the match indicator and ci(r) . [0, 1] is the confidence. The thirteen signal types partition into heuristic and learned categories based on whether they require neural inference. 3.2 Heuristic Signals Heuristic signals use deterministic or statistical algorithms with sub-millisecond latency: Keyword (.kw). Rules are defined as pattern sets with Boolean combinators. Each rule specifies a set of patterns P = {p1,...,pk} with a combinator .{and, or, nor} and one of three matching methods: ź Regex (default): compiled regular expressions with word boundaries; confidence is 1.0 on match. ź BM25: BM25 scoring dispatched to a Rust-backed classifier via FFI. Each keyword is scored against the request using TF-IDF term weighting, and the rule matches when the score exceeds a configurable threshold (default 0.1). Confidence is derived from the BM25 score, providing a graded relevance signal rather than a binary match. ź N-gram: character n-gram similarity (default trigram) dispatched to the same Rust binding. The rule matches when the Jaccard similarity between the keyword and request n-gram sets exceeds a threshold (default 0.4), providing inherent tolerance to typos and morphological variation without a dedicated fuzzy-matching pass. Heuristic (<1ms) Figure 4: Signal extraction taxonomy and evaluation flow. An incoming request is evalu.ated in parallel against heuristic signals (sub-millisecond, deterministic) and learned signals (neural inference via LoRA classifiers). Only signal types referenced by configured decisions are computed (demand-driven evaluation). Results merge into the structured signal result S(r). W For and: f(r)= match(pi,r); for or: f(r)= match(pi,r). The combinators applyii uniformly across all three methods. Context Length (.ctx). Rules define token-count intervals [l, u]. Given estimated token count t(r), the rule matches iff l ▓ t(r) ▓ u. This enables complexity-aware routing (e.g., short queries to fast models, long contexts to extended-context models). Language (.lang). Rules bind detected language codes to named signals using statistical n-gram detection over 100+ languages. Enables language-specific routing (e.g., CJK queries to multilingual-specialized models). Authorization (.authz). Role-based access control signals extracted from request headers, supporting a pluggable authentication factory. The authz signal layer abstracts over multi.ple identity providers (API key, OAuth2/OIDC, cloud IAM, custom JWT, LDAP) through provider-specific extractors that resolve user identities and group memberships from creden.tials. Role bindings then map resolved identities to named signals, enabling per-role routing policies (e.g., premium users routed to higher-quality models, free-tier users restricted to cost-effective models). This inbound authorization (who is the user and what can they ac.cess?) is complementary to the outbound authorization factory (Section 12.5) that injects provider-specific credentials when forwarding to backends. 3.3 Learned Signals Learned signals require neural inference, typically 10ą100ms, using the LoRA-based classi.fiers described in Section 9. Why encoder-based models. The choice of bidirectional encoders (ModernBERT Warner et al. (2024), mmBERT-32K for long-context tasks) rather than unidirectional decoders for signal extraction is not merely an efficiency decisiončit reflects a fundamental information-theoretic principle. Routing requires understanding the query: determining its domain, complexity, intent, modality, and the precise location of sensitive content. Understanding, in Shannonšs framework Shannon (1948), corresponds to building representations that max.imize the mutual information I(H; Y ) between the hidden states H and the task label Y . A bidirectional encoder conditions every token on the full context in both directions, pro.ducing hidden states that capture the complete information structure of the input; a causal decoder, by contrast, conditions each token only on its left contextčits representations are optimized for next-token prediction I(ht; xt+1), which captures generative continuation rather than discriminative understanding. This bidirectional ęunderstandingė is exploited at three distinct granularities across the signal types: ź Sequence-level (CLS pooling): For domain classification, jailbreak detection, fact-check gating, modality classification, and user feedback, the pooled CLS representation acts as an approximate sufficient statisticča fixed-dimensional vector that compresses the queryšs global semantics while discarding positional detail irrelevant to the label. ź Token-level (per-token hidden states): For PII detection and hallucination span identi.fication, the position of information mattersčwhich tokens are names, which spans are unsupported claims. Here the full sequence of hidden states (h1,..., hT ) is retained, preserving the positional mutual information I(ht; yt) that CLS pooling would discard. ź Cross-sequence (cross-encoder): For NLI-based hallucination explanation (Section 8), the encoder jointly attends over a (claim, evidence) pair, maximizing the inter-sequence mutual information I(claim; evidence) through full cross-attentionča capacity unavail.able to architectures that encode each sequence independently. In each case, the encoderšs unrestricted attention patternčthe absence of a causal maskčis what enables maximal information extraction at the granularity the task demands. Embedding Similarity (.emb). Each rule defines reference texts {t1,...,tk} and a simi.larity threshold .. The request embedding er is computed via a shared embedding model, and the rule matches iff: max cos(er, eti ) │ . (3)i The confidence equals the maximum cosine similarity. This provides scalable semantic matching without per-rule model training. Domain Classification (.dom). A LoRA-adapted classifier trained on MMLU categories maps requests to domain labels (STEM, humanities, code, creative writing, etc.). The classification confidence serves as the signal confidence. Factual Grounding (.fact). A binary classifier (the HaluGate Sentinel, Section 8) deter.mines whether the query requires factual verification, distinguishing factual questions from creative or code-generation tasks. User Feedback (.fb). A multi-class classifier detects satisfaction, dissatisfaction, clarifica.tion requests, and preference for alternatives, enabling feedback-driven routing adjustments. Modality (.mod). A three-class classifier (autoregressive, diffusion, both) determines the appropriate model modality for the request, trained on mixed text-generation and image-generation datasets. Complexity (.cpx). A contrastive embedding classifier estimates query difficulty. Each complexity rule defines two sets of candidate exemplarsčhard (e.g., multi-step reasoning problems) and easy (e.g., simple factual lookups)čwhose embeddings are precomputed at initialization. At query time, the query embedding is compared against both sets via cosine similarity: . = max sim(q, h) . max sim(q, e) (4)h.H e.E where H and E are the hard and easy candidate sets. The difficulty level is then hard if .>., easy if .< .., and medium otherwise, for a per-rule threshold .. Multiple complexity rules can coexist (e.g., code_complexity, math_complexity), each with its own candidate sets and threshold. Composer conditions can restrict when a rule firesčfor instance, evaluating code_complexity only when the domain signal indicates computer science. Jailbreak Detection (.jb). Each jailbreak rule selects one of two detection methods via a method field (default: classifier). BERT classifier method. A binary/ternary classifier detects adversarial prompt injection and jailbreak attempts. Each rule defines a confidence threshold .; the signal fires when jailbreak confidence c │ .. An optional include_history flag controls whether only the latest user message or the full conversation history is analyzed, trading latency for recall against multi-turn attacks. Multiple rules at different thresholds enable per-decision sensitivityča public chatbot may use . =0.65, while an internal tool uses . =0.9 to minimize false positives. Contrastive embedding method. Analogous to the complexity signal, each rule defines two sets of exemplar patternsčjailbreak (Kjb, e.g., ęIgnore all previous instructionsė) and be.nign (Kben, e.g., ęWhat is the weather todayė)čwhose embeddings are precomputed at initialization. At request time the contrastive score for a message m is: .(m) = max sim(m, j) . max sim(m, b) (5)j.Kjb b.Kben When include_history is enabled, the system evaluates every user message in the con.versation and takes the maximum score across all turns: Ų = maxm.Muser .(m). The rule fires when Ų │ . (default . =0.10). This max-contrastive-chain aggregation is specifically designed to catch ęboiling frogė multi-turn attacks where each individual message may score below threshold but the conversation contains at least one escalation turn. Both methods coexist within the same signal type; a single deployment can define BERT and contrastive rules simultaneously and combine them in decision logic using OR (fire if either detects) or use them at different priority levels for graduated response. Classifier details are described in Section 7. PII Detection (.pii). A token-level NER classifier identifies personally identifiable infor.mation (person names, emails, phone numbers, SSNs, credit cards, etc.). Each rule specifies a confidence threshold and an optional allow-list of PII entity types. The signal fires when any PII type not in the allow-list is detected above threshold. This per-rule policy model enables differentiated enforcement: a medical application may allow person while block.ing ssn, whereas a public chatbot blocks all PII types. Classifier details are described in Section 7. Preference (.pref). Personalized routing based on user interaction history. 3.4 Parallel Evaluation with Lazy Computation A key optimization is demand-driven evaluation: the engine computes only sig-S nal types referenced by at least one configured decision. Let Tused = {. |d.D . condition in d of type .}. Signal evaluators for types in Tused are launched as concur.rent coroutines, with heuristic signals completing before learned signals due to their sub-millisecond latency. This demand-driven approach avoids the cost of unused signal types. In typical configura.tions with 3ą5 active signal types out of thirteen, this reduces total signal extraction latency by 50ą70% compared to exhaustive evaluation. The strategy has a natural information-theoretic interpretation. Shannonšs source coding theorem Shannon (1948) establishes that optimal codes assign shorter codewords to more probable symbols; analogously, demand-driven evaluation assigns zero computational cost to signals that carry no routing informa.tion in the current configuration, and full cost only to those that do. If we view each signal typešs evaluation cost ci as a ęcodeword lengthė and its relevance indicator 1[.i .Tused] as the probability of being needed, then demand-driven evaluation minimizes the expected P evaluation cost i ci ß 1[.i .Tused]čthe computational analogue of minimizing expected code length. 3.5 Extensibility The thirteen signal types described above represent the current built-in set; the framework is not limited to these. The signal extraction layer defines a uniform interfacečeach signal type implements an evaluation function f : R.{0, 1}.[0, 1]čand the decision engine references signals solely by type and rule name. Adding a new signal type requires only implementing this interface and registering the type; no changes to the decision engine, plugin chain, or deployment infrastructure are needed. This open architecture allows operators to introduce domain-specific signals (e.g., regulatory compliance classifiers, custom toxicity detectors) alongside the built-in types. 3.6 Bidirectional Signal Flow Signals are not limited to the inbound request path. The system also extracts signals from model responses, enabling closed-loop routing policies that adapt based on output characteristics. The primary example is HaluGate (Section 8): the Sentinel classifier on the request path determines whether a query requires factual verification (the .fact signal), and if so, the Detector and Explainer stages analyze the modelšs response for unsupported claimsčproducing response-side detection results (confidence scores, hallucinated spans, NLI explanations) that are propagated via HTTP headers or body annotations. This bidi.rectional flowčrequest signals gating which response analyses to perform, and response signals feeding back into observability and policy enforcementčenables adaptive quality assurance without imposing uniform overhead on all requests. 3.7 Information-Theoretic Signal Analysis With N signal types evaluated per request, a natural question is whether all signals con.tribute independently to routing quality or whether some carry redundant information. Information theory provides the formal framework for this analysis. For a signal type .i and the routing outcome variable Y (the selected model), the mutual information I(.i; Y ) quantifies the reduction in uncertainty about the routing decision pro.vided by observing signal .i. The conditional mutual information I(.i; Y | .j ) measures the additional information from .i given that .j is already observed. When I(.i; Y | .j ) ┼ 0, signals .i and .j are redundant with respect to routingčobserving both provides no more discriminative power than observing one. This analysis enables two optimizations. First, adaptive signal pruning: in a given de.ployment configuration, signals with near-zero mutual information with the routing out.come can be disabled without affecting routing quality, reducing extraction latency be.yond the demand-driven approach of Section 3. Second, information-ordered evaluation: evaluating high-I(.i; Y ) signals first and short-circuiting when the decision outcome is al.ready determinedčanalogous to early termination in decision treesčcan reduce average per-request evaluation cost. The minimum description length (MDL) principle Rissanen (1978) provides a complementary perspective: the optimal signal subset is the one that describes the routing policy with minimum total code length, balancing signal extraction cost against routing precision. 3.8 Interpretation as Hybrid Embedding The signal extraction layer maps a raw request r to a structured signal vector s = S(r) . {0, 1}N . [0, 1]N , where each dimension corresponds to a named signal condition and its associated confidence. This operation is functionally analogous to the embedding layer of a Transformer Vaswani et al. (2017): both convert unstructured input (token sequences or natural-language queries) into a high-dimensional representation suitable for downstream computation. However, the analogy is not merely structuralčit reveals a key design distinction. Trans.former embeddings produce dense, opaque vectors optimized end-to-end for a downstream task. The signal vector s, by contrast, is interpretable by construction: each dimension has a human-readable name (e.g., domain:mathematics, complexity:high), a defined seman.tic type, and an independently auditable extraction pipeline. This interpretability is not incidental but architecturally enforced: the decision engine references signals by type and name, so the signal vector must be a structured, symbolic representation rather than a latent embedding. We characterize this as a hybrid embedding: the extraction methods span a spectrum from sub-millisecond heuristics (keyword matching, regex patterns) to learned neural classifiers (LoRA-based domain and complexity models, embedding similarity), yet all project onto the same interpretable coordinate system. Figure 5 illustrates this comparison. Transformer Embedding Layer interpretable, structured, hybrid Figure 5: Comparison of embedding strategies. Top: A Transformer embedding layer produces dense, opaque vectors optimized end-to-end. Bottom: The VSR signal extrac.tion layer produces structured, interpretable signal vectors from heterogeneous extractors (heuristic, learned, LoRA-based), where each dimension has a human-readable semantic name. The dashed arrow marks the functional correspondence: both convert unstructured input into a representation for downstream computation, but the signal vector is inter.pretable by construction. 4 Decision Engine The decision engine evaluates a set of routing decisions against the signal result and selects the best match. In Shannonšs 1938 masteršs thesis Shannon (1938), arbitrary switching-circuit behavior was shown to be representable and minimizable through Boolean algebrač any desired inputąoutput relation over binary signals could be systematically synthesized from {., ., ┬}. The decision engine applies this same principle to routing: each routing policy is expressed as a Boolean formula over binary signal conditions, and the functionally complete operator set guarantees that any routing policy expressible as a function of the extracted signals can be realizedčwithout modifying the signal layer or the execution layer. We formalize the decision model, present the evaluation algorithm, and analyze the selection strategies. 4.1 Decision Model Definition 4 (Decision). A decision d =(n, ., Md, .d,p) consists of a name n, a Boolean formula . over signal conditions, a candidate model set Md .M, a plugin configuration .d, and a priority p . Z. Definition 5 (Rule Node č Boolean Expression Tree). A rule node . is defined recursively as one of two forms (Figure 6 illustrates example expression trees): ź Leaf (signal reference): . = leaf(., n), referencing a signal type . and rule name n. ź Composite (Boolean operator): . =(op, [.1,...,.k]), where op .{and, or, not} and .1,...,.k are child rule nodes. not is strictly unary (k =1). Evaluation proceeds by structural recursion:.  1 . (., 1,c) . S(r): ... = . . ..n = n if . = leaf(., n) .k. eval(.i,S(r)) if op = andi=1eval(., S(r)) = (6)k eval(.i,S(r)) if op = or . i=1 . ┬ eval(.1,S(r)) if op = not The recursive structure enables arbitrarily nested Boolean expressions. Classical flat formulasča single AND or OR over leaf conditionsčare the depth-1 special case and remain the recommended form for simple routing policies. When richer logic is needed, nesting ex.presses compound operators directly within a single decision: nor(A, B) = not(or(A, B)); nand(A, B) = not(and(A, B)); xor(A, B) = or(and(A, not(B)), and(not(A),B)). YAMLšs natural indentation mirrors the logical nesting, preserving readability and auditability even for complex formulas. Priority-ordered decisions compose multiple such formulas into an or.dered evaluation, providing conflict resolution and organizational structure for deployment-scale routing policies. (a) Flat (depth-1) (b) NOR (c) XOR Figure 6: Rule-node expression trees at increasing depth. (a) A flat depth-1 tree: AND over three leaf conditions. (b) A NOR expression: not(or(cs, math)), matching all non-STEM queries. (c) An XOR expression composed from AND, OR, and NOT primitives, routing requests that match exactly one of two signals. Leaf nodes (gray) reference signal conditions; composite nodes use AND (blue), OR (green), and NOT (orange). 4.2 Confidence Computation When a decision matches, we compute a confidence score as the mean confidence over satisfied conditions: 1conf(d, S(r)) = cj(r) (7)|.sat| .j ..sat where .sat = {.j . . | sat(.j ,S(r)) = 1} and cj(r) is the signal confidence for condition .j . For embedding signals, cj is the cosine similarity; for heuristic and binary ML signals, cj =1.0. 4.3 Selection Strategies Given the set of matched decisions Dmatch = {d .D| eval(.d,S(r)) = 1}, two strategies select d.: Priority Strategy. d . = arg max pd (8)d.Dmatch Algorithm 1 Decision Evaluation Require: Signal result S(r), decisions D, strategy . .{priority, confidence}.Ensure: Selected decision d. , confidence c 1: Dmatch .. 2: for d .D do 3: if eval(.d,S(r)) then 4: cd . conf(d, S(r)) 5: Dmatch .Dmatch .{(d, cd)}6: end if 7: end for 8: if . = priority then 9: (d. ,c .) . arg max(d,c).Dmatch pd 10: else 11: (d. ,c .) . arg max(d,c).Dmatch c 12: end if 13: return (d. ,c .) This provides deterministic, administrator-controlled routing. Ties are broken by insertion order. Confidence Strategy. d . = arg max conf(d, S(r)) (9)d.Dmatch This enables data-driven routing where embedding similarity and classifier confidence drive selection. The priority strategy is the default for production deployments where predictability is paramount. The confidence strategy is preferred for experimental settings where the system should adapt to query characteristics. 4.4 Evaluation Algorithm The algorithm runs in O(M ß Lmax) where M = |D| is the number of decisions and Lmax is the maximum number of conditions per decision. In practice, M ▓ 50 and Lmax ▓ 10, making decision evaluation negligible (< 0.1 ms) relative to signal extraction. 4.5 Expressiveness Analysis The recursive rule-node model can express common routing patterns with depth-1 trees (flat formulas) and richer patterns through nesting: ź Domain routing: A single leaf condition routes by classified domain. ź Guarded routing: AND of a domain condition and a complexity condition routes com.plex queries within a domain to a capable model. ź Exclusion routing: and(domain, not(complexity)) routes simple queries within a do.main to a lightweight model, avoiding the cost of a full-capability model for straightfor.ward requests. ź Multi-signal routing: AND of keyword, embedding, and language conditions provides precise routing for specific query patterns. ź Fallback chains: Multiple decisions with decreasing priority and progressively broader conditions implement fallback routing. ź NOR routing (blanket exclusion): not(or(cs, math, physics)) routes all non-STEM queries to a general-purpose model without enumerating every non-STEM domain. ź NAND routing (conditional exemption): not(and(zh, code)) matches all requests ex.cept Chinese-language code queries, useful for compliance-based routing. ź XOR routing (mutual exclusion): or(and(A, not(B)), and(not(A),B)) routes re.quests matching exactly one of two signals, enabling exclusive specialization. ź Nested multi-signal: and(or(cs, math_kw), en, not(long_ctx)) combines disjunc.tive, conjunctive, and negated sub-trees in a single decision for fine-grained routing. Functional completeness. The expressiveness of the recursive rule-node model rests on a classical result from Boolean algebra Huntington (1904): the operator set {., ., ┬} is functionally completečany Boolean function f : {0, 1}N .{0, 1} can be expressed as a formula over these operators. Because each rule node may nest AND, OR, and NOT to arbitrary depth, a single decision formula . can already represent any Boolean function over the N signal match indicatorsčno multi-decision composition is required for completeness. Proposition 1 (Single-decision completeness). For any Boolean function f : {0, 1}N . {0, 1} over signal match indicators, there exists a rule node . using AND, OR, and NOT such that eval(., S(r)) = f(S(r)) for all signal results S(r). Proof sketch. Construct . directly from the truth table of f. For each minterm (input assign.ment where f =1), form an AND-node over the corresponding literals (a leaf leaf(.i,ni) when the i-th signal is 1, or not(leaf(.i,ni)) when it is 0). Collect all such AND-nodes un.der a single OR-node. Since {., ., ┬} is functionally complete, the resulting tree evaluates to f. Proposition 2 (Routing policy completeness). For any routing policy ╣ : {0, 1}N .M. {.} mapping signal vectors to model selections, there exists a decision set D with recursive AND/OR/NOT formulas and priority ordering such that ╣ is realized by the evaluation algorithm (Algorithm 1). Proof sketch. For each model mk in the range of ╣, construct a single decision dk whose rule node encodes the Boolean function fk(s)= 1[╣(s)= mk] using the single-decision completeness result above. Assign priorities to resolve overlaps deterministically. This two-level universality guaranteečcompleteness within a single decision and across a decision setčmeans the decision engine imposes no inherent limitation on what routing policies can be configured. Priority ordering across decisions is no longer required for ex.pressiveness; it serves as an organizational and conflict-resolution mechanism, equivalent to a decision list Rivest (1987) over Boolean features. Structural analogy to combinational logic circuits. The recursive rule-node model maps naturally onto the hierarchy of combinational logic circuits studied in digital de.sign Brayton et al. (1984). The following table summarizes the correspondence at three levels of generality: Circuit Model  Routing System  Expressiveness  PLA (two-level) Fleisher & Maissel (1975) General combinational  Flat decision (depth-1 tree) Recursive rule-node tree  Any two-level Boolean function Any Boolean function  circuit  Circuit array + priority encoder  Decision set + priority ordering  Any routing policy ╣ : {0, 1}N .M  At the first level, a depth-1 rule nodeča single AND or OR over leaf conditionsčis struc.turally isomorphic to a Programmable Logic Array (PLA) Fleisher & Maissel (1975): signal extractors correspond to input lines, leaf conditions to the AND-plane, and the top-level operator to the OR-plane. At the second level, a recursive rule-node tree corresponds to a general combinational logic circuitča directed acyclic graph of AND, OR, and NOT gatesčwhere each decision is a complete circuit computing an arbitrary Boolean function. At the third level, the priority-ordered decision set acts as an array of such circuits with a priority encoder selecting the output, realizing any routing policy. Figure 7 illustrates this three-level correspondence. Level 1: PLA Level 2: General Circuit Level 3: Circuit Array arbitrary depth routing policy Figure 7: Three-level correspondence between combinational logic circuits and the decision engine. Level 1: A PLA with AND-plane and OR-plane corresponds to a flat (depth-1) decision formula. Level 2: A general combinational circuit with arbitrarily nested AND, OR, and NOT gates corresponds to a recursive rule-node tree within a single decision. Level 3: An array of circuits with a priority encoder corresponds to the full decision set with priority-ordered evaluation, realizing any routing policy. In a PLA, logic is ęprogrammedė by setting fuse connections; in a general circuit, by wiring gates; in our system, by YAML configuration whose indentation directly mirrors the gate-level nesting. This correspondence provides a well-understood theoretical founda.tion: decades of results on logic minimization, hazard-free design, and testability Brayton et al. (1984) apply directly to reasoning about decision optimization and coverage analysis. Decision set verification and minimization. The combinational-logic correspondence makes formal analysis tools from logic synthesis directly applicable to routing configura.tions. Coverage analysis checks whether every reachable point in the signal space {0, 1}N is matched by at least one decision, identifying dead zones where requests would receive no routing directive. Conflict detection identifies signal combinations where multiple decisions match but route to incompatible model pools, flagging ambiguities that priority ordering must resolve. Decision minimization, analogous to the Espresso heuristic for two-level logic optimization Brayton et al. (1984) and multi-level logic restructuring Brayton et al. (1984), can reduce a decision set to a minimal equivalent form by merging decisions with compati.ble conditions and eliminating subsumed rules. These standard logic-verification techniques become applicable to routing policy validation without adaptation, a direct consequence of the structural isomorphism. 4.6 Generalization to Fuzzy Evaluation The Boolean decision model admits a natural generalization when signal confidence scores are continuous. Rather than binarizing each signalšs output before Boolean combination, we evaluate rule-node trees over the continuous confidence values directly, using fuzzy logic operators Zadeh (1965). Definition 6 (Fuzzy Rule-Node Evaluation). Given continuous signal confidences c(r) . [0, 1] for each leaf condition, the fuzzy evaluation of a rule node . is defined by structural recursion: . c.(r) if . = leaf(., n) . k.min eval(.i,S(r)) if op = and g i=1eval(., S(r)) = (10) k max eval(.i,S(r)) if op = or . i=1 . 1 . g if op = noteval(.1,S(r)) where c.(r) is the confidence score of the signal matching leaf .. The operators (min, max, 1.x) form the standard fuzzy complement triple and satisfy De Morganšs laws at every level of the tree, preserving the algebraic properties of the crisp model Bellman & Zadeh (1970). This fuzzy evaluation is a strict generalization: when all confidences are binary (c .{0, 1}), min reduces to ., max reduces to ., and 1.x reduces to ┬, so the evaluation coincides exactly with the crisp Boolean model. The practical consequence is significant. The current confidence strategy (Equation (7)) uses mean confidence as a tiebreaker after binary matching. Fuzzy evaluation incorporates con.fidence during formula evaluation: a decision with three conditions matched at confidences (0.95, 0.88, 0.72) yields a fuzzy AND score of 0.72, while a decision with two conditions at (0.99, 0.98) scores 0.98čcorrectly preferring the more confident partial match even when both decisions pass binary evaluation. The functional completeness result of the previous section extends directly: the fuzzy operator triple (min, max, 1.x) is functionally complete over the continuous lattice [0, 1], so any monotone routing policy over continuous signal scores is realizable. 4.7 Composable Decision Profiles The decision model directly enables composable signal orchestration: different deployment scenarios are expressed as different decision sets D over the same signal infrastructure. A healthcare deployment defines decisions with authz and domain conditions routing to compliant model pools; a developer-tool deployment defines decisions with complexity and keyword conditions routing to cost-optimized cascades; a multi-cloud deployment defines decisions with domain and modality conditions, using latency-aware model selection across provider endpoints. Formally, switching deployment scenarios corresponds to loading a different decision profile D., while the signal extraction layer S and plugin implementations . remain unchanged. This separation of policy (what decisions to evaluate) from mechanism (how signals are computed and plugins execute) is the architectural basis for the composability claimed in Section 2. 4.8 Interpretation as Mixture-of-Experts Gating The priority-ordered decision evaluation admits a precise structural analogy to the Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) gating mechanism Shazeer et al. (2017). In a standard MoE layer, a gating network G(x) computes a sparse distribution over K expert sub-networks, and the output is a weighted combination of the selected expertsš outputs. In our system: ź The signal vector s plays the role of the shared representation that the gating network operates on. ź Each decision block di with its Boolean formula .i(s) acts as an expert gateča binary function that determines whether expert i (a model pool with associated plugins) is activated. ź Priority ordering implements hard routing with early exit: the first decision whose gate evaluates to true captures the request, analogous to top-1 expert selection in sparse MoE but with a deterministic, priority-based selection rule rather than a learned softmax. Figure 8 formalizes this correspondence. Unlike standard MoE, the gates here are symbolic (Boolean formulas over interpretable signals) rather than learned softmax projections, which enables formal verifiability and compositional editability. Sparse MoE Layer VSR Decision Engine learned softmax gating symbolic Boolean gating Figure 8: Structural analogy between Mixture-of-Experts gating and the VSR decision engine. Left: In a sparse MoE layer, a learned gating network selects top-k experts via softmax. Right: In VSR, Boolean formulas over the signal vector act as symbolic expert gates, with priority ordering implementing deterministic early-exit selection. Dashed arrows mark the structural correspondence. 4.9 Layered Entropy-Folding Interpretation The priority-ordered gate stack also admits an information-theoretic interpretation as a layered uncertainty-collapse process. Let g.(s) .{0, 1} denote the match outcome of the ..th gate under priority order, and let Z. = g.(s). Define routing uncertainty after . evaluated gates as: U. = H(M | s,Z1:.) (11) where M is the final selected model random variable. By the chain rule of mutual informa.tion: U.+1 = U. . I(M; Z.+1 | s,Z1:.) ▓ U. (12) so each additional gate can only maintain or reduce uncertainty. In this sense, priority depth is control depth: a sequence of policy constraints that folds entropy toward a deterministic choice. The MoE analogy also clarifies what the system is not: it is not a Transformer in the sequential sense. Transformer blocks transform the representation layer by layerčeach blockšs output is the next blockšs input. In our architecture, all decision blocks operate on the same shared signal vector s; there is no inter-decision information flow. The priority ordering is an early-exit mechanism over parallel evaluations, not a sequential transformation pipeline. This distinction is important: it means that adding or removing decisions does not affect the behavior of other decisions (modulo priority reordering), a composability property that sequential architectures lack. 5 Plugin Framework The plugin layer provides a composable middleware architecture where each matched de.cision activates an independent chain of typed transformations. We describe the plugin Transformer-Style Entropy Folding (Control Depth) Structural analogy only. This stack folds uncertainty over a shared s (control depth), not hidden-state updates Figure 9: Transformer-style visualization of layered control depth in VSR. Signal extraction constructs a shared embedding s; stacked decision layers apply Boolean gates ..(s) that progressively reduce routing uncertainty U.; selection resolves (d. ,m .) via priority early-exit; plugin composition .d. acts as an output-side projection head over request/response behavior. model and four core infrastructure plugins; safety signal classifiers are covered in Section 7, hallucination detection in Section 8, and memory retrieval and RAG injection in Section 13. 5.1 Plugin Execution Model Formally, a plugin ╣ is a typed transformation on the request-response pair: ╣ :(Request, Context, Config╣) . (Request . , Response . ) . {.} (13) where . denotes early termination (e.g., a cache hit returning immediately or a fast response short-circuiting the pipeline). Plugins execute in a fixed pipeline order within each decisionšs chain. On the request path: fast response . cache . RAG . modality . memory . system prompt . header muta.tion. On the response path: hallucination detection . cache write. Each plugin is indepen.dently enabled per decision, and its configuration (thresholds, modes, policies) is scoped to that decision. Jailbreak and PII detection are first-class signals (Sections 3 and 7) evaluated in parallel with all other signal types, not serial plugins in the request path. Decisions that match safety signals activate the fast_response plugin to return an immediate rejection. This per-decision scoping is a key architectural distinction from systems that apply safety and caching globally: it allows differentiated policies for different routing outcomes within the same deployment. 5.2 Output-Space Projection Perspective For a matched decision d. , the plugin chain can be interpreted as a policy-scoped projection from routing state to deployment-compliant output behavior: .d. = ╣n . ╣n.1 .ßßß. ╣1 (14) where each ╣i is a typed transformation in the configured chain. Functionally, this is analo.gous to an output projection stage after gating: once the decision fixes the active policy path, plugins realize that policy as concrete transformations on request/response state (e.g., con.text injection, auth header mutation, hallucination annotation, cache write-through). This analogy is operational rather than architectural: unlike a Transformer projection head, .d. is a configurable symbolic composition, not a learned linear map. 5.3 Semantic Cache The semantic cache exploits the observation that semantically similar queries often produce equivalent responses, avoiding redundant model invocations. Similarity model. Given a query q extracted from request r, the cache searches for an entry e such that: cos(eq, ee) │ .d (15) where eq, ee are embeddings computed by the shared embedding model and .d is the per-decision similarity threshold. On hit, the cached response is returned immediately, bypassing model invocation entirely. Write-through protocol. On cache miss, a pending entry is registered before forwarding to the model. Upon receiving the response, the entry is completed with the response con.tent. This ensures that concurrent identical queries observe the pending state rather than triggering redundant model calls. Backend abstraction. Four backends provide different latency-persistence tradeoffs: (1) in-memory HNSW for single-node low-latency deployments; (2) Redis for distributed persistent caching; (3) Milvus for large-scale approximate nearest neighbor search; (4) a hybrid two-tier design combining in-memory HNSW (fast path) with Milvus (persistent store). 5.4 System Prompt Injection Per-decision system prompt injection enables different routing paths to carry different in.structions. Two composition modes are defined: ź Replace: Substitutes the entire system message, providing complete control over the modelšs behavioral context. ź Insert: Prepends the decisionšs prompt to the existing system message, augmenting without overriding user-provided instructions. This enables patterns such as injecting domain-specific instructions for expert routing or safety preambles for sensitive query categories. 5.5 Header Mutation Header mutation enables metadata propagation to downstream model backends via HTTP header modifications (add, update, delete). This supports use cases including: backend.specific authentication injection, routing decision metadata propagation for downstream observability, and custom signaling to model-serving frameworks (e.g., LoRA adapter selec.tion via headers). 5.6 Fast Response The fast response plugin enables a decision to short-circuit the entire pipeline and return an immediate OpenAI-compatible response without forwarding the request to any upstream model. This is the primary mechanism for acting on safety signals. Execution model. When a decisionšs fast_response plugin is configured, the pipeline checks for it before any other plugin in the chain. If present, the configured message is returned as a standard chat.completion response with finish_reason: "stop", and no further processing occurs. Streaming compatibility. The plugin inspects the original requestšs stream parame.ter. For non-streaming requests, it returns a single JSON object. For streaming re.quests (stream: true), it generates a Server-Sent Events (SSE) sequence: an initial chunk with the assistant role, word-by-word content chunks, a final chunk with finish_reason: "stop", and the [DONE] sentinelčmatching the exact format that OpenAI-compatible clients expect. Use cases. The canonical use case is safety enforcement: a decision matching a jailbreak or PII signal activates fast_response to return a policy-compliant refusal message. However, the plugin is general-purposečit can also serve canned responses for FAQ-like queries, main.tenance windows, or rate-limited fallback messages without consuming model compute. 6 Programmable Neural-Symbolic Configuration Language While the YAML configuration format described in preceding sections is sufficient for direct human authorship, it conflates two concerns: the logical specification of routing policy (sig.nals, decisions, plugins) and the deployment target (flat YAML, Kubernetes CRDs, Helm charts). We introduce a programmable configuration languagečthe instruction set of the neural-symbolic inference engine (formalized in Section 6.8)čthat separates these concerns, providing a concise, human-readable, and machine-parseable surface syntax for routing poli.cies that compiles to multiple deployment targets through a shared internal representation. 6.1 Design Goals The DSL is designed around four principles: 1. Conciseness: Routing policies should read as close to natural language as possible, minimizing syntactic noise relative to YAML. 2. Type safety: Signal references in Boolean expressions are resolved at compile time; undefined or misspelled signal names produce diagnostics before deployment. 3. Multi-target emission: A single DSL source compiles to flat YAML (for local de.velopment), Kubernetes SemanticRouter CRDs (for operator-based deployment), or Helm values.yaml (for chart-based deployment). 4. Round-trip fidelity: An existing RouterConfig can be decompiled back to DSL source, enabling migration from YAML to DSL and ęround-tripė editing workflows. 6.2 Concrete Syntax The DSL defines five top-level block types: SIGNAL, ROUTE, PLUGIN, BACKEND, and GLOBAL. Figure 10 shows a representative configuration. Each SIGNAL block declares a named signal of a specific type (one of 12 supported types: keyword, embedding, domain, fact_check, user_feedback, preference, language, context, complexity, modality, authz, jailbreak, pii). Each ROUTE block defines a decision with a priority, a Boolean WHEN clause over signal references, one or more model references with optional per-model parameters (reasoning mode, effort level, LoRA adapter, weight), an optional selection algorithm, and zero or more plugin attachments. PLUGIN SIGNAL domain math { mmlu_categories: ["math"] } SIGNAL keyword urgent { operator: "any", keywords: ["urgent","asap"] } PLUGIN safe_pii pii { enabled: true, pii_types_allowed: [] } ROUTE math_route (description = "Math") { PRIORITY 100 WHEN domain("math") MODEL "qwen2.5:3b" (reasoning = true, effort = "high") PLUGIN safe_pii } ROUTE urgent_ai { PRIORITY 200 WHEN keyword("urgent") AND NOT domain("math") MODEL "qwen3:70b" (reasoning = true), "qwen2.5:3b" (reasoning = false) ALGORITHM confidence { threshold: 0.5 } } BACKEND vllm_endpoint ollama { address: "127.0.0.1", port: 11434 } GLOBAL { default_model: "qwen2.5:3b", strategy: "priority" } Figure 10: A representative DSL configuration defining two signals, a reusable plugin tem.plate, two routes with Boolean decision logic, a backend endpoint, and global settings. blocks at the top level define reusable templates that routes reference by name; inline plu.gin blocks within routes define route-specific configurations. 6.3 Grammar and Parsing The lexer and parser are implemented using the participle parser-generator li.brary Thomas (2024). The lexer defines 12 token classes (identifiers, integers, floats, strings, booleans, braces, parentheses, brackets, colon, comma, equals, comments) via regular ex.pressions. The parser uses a PEG-style grammar with lookahead 3 to resolve ambiguities between signal references and other identifier uses. The Boolean expression grammar for WHEN clauses follows standard precedence: BoolExpr ::= AndTerm (OR AndTerm) . (16) AndTerm ::= Factor (AND Factor) . (17) Factor ::= NOT Factor | ( BoolExpr ) | SignalRef (18) SignalRef ::= type ( ęnameė ) (19) This grammar is parsed into a recursive AST (BoolAnd, BoolOr, BoolNot, SignalRefExpr nodes) that the compiler flattens into the RuleCombination tree consumed by the decision engine (Section 4). Figure 11 illustrates the AST for a representative Boolean expression. Error recovery is block-granular: if parsing a top-level block fails, the parser splits the input at block boundaries and attempts to parse remaining blocks independently, accumulating partial results alongside error diagnostics. This enables IDE-like incremental feedback dur.ing authoring. 6.4 Compilation Pipeline The compilation pipeline (Figure 12) transforms DSL source through four stages: 1. Lexing: The source is tokenized into a stream of typed tokens with position tracking for diagnostic reporting. 2. Parsing: The token stream is parsed into a raw parse tree (participle-generated structs), then lowered to a resolved AST (Program . SignalDecl, RouteDecl, PluginDecl, BackendDecl, GlobalDecl) with desugared values and resolved posi.tions. 3. Compilation: The AST is compiled to the internal RouterConfig structure. This involves: (a) mapping each SIGNAL block to the appropriate signal configuration (keyword rules, embedding rules, domain categories, etc.); (b) flattening the Boolean expression tree in each WHEN clause into a RuleCombination tree with AND/OR/NOT operators; (c) resolving plugin references against top-level templates with field-level merge semantics (route-local fields override template defaults); and (d) mapping BACKEND blocks to endpoint, provider profile, embedding model, or semantic cache configurations based on the backend type keyword. 4. Emission: The RouterConfig is serialized to one of three target formats. BoolAnd Figure 12: The DSL compilation pipeline. Source text is lexed, parsed into a resolved AST, and compiled to the internal RouterConfig. From this representation, three emitters produce deployment-specific formats (flat YAML, Kubernetes CRD, Helm values). The decompiler reverses the pipeline, reconstructing DSL source from an existing RouterConfig, enabling round-trip editing. The validator operates on the AST directly, producing three-level diagnostics. 6.5 Multi-Target Emission The shared RouterConfig representation enables three emission targets from a single DSL source: ź Flat YAML (EmitYAML): Direct marshaling of RouterConfig for local development and testing. An alternative EmitUserYAML variant restructures the output into the nested signals/providers format expected by the CLI tooling. ź Kubernetes CRD (EmitCRD): Wraps the routing logic in a SemanticRouter custom resource (vllm.ai/v1alpha1), mapping backend definitions to spec.vllmEndpoints and routing configuration to spec.config. Signal rules that the CRD schema does not model are preserved as extra fields for ConfigMap.based deployment compatibility. ź Helm values (EmitHelm): Nests the RouterConfig under a config: key compat.ible with the Helm chartšs ConfigMap template, pruning zero-value infrastructure sections for clean output. This separation means that infrastructure teams can change deployment targets without modifying the routing policy, and routing engineers can evolve policies without understand.ing Kubernetes manifests. 6.6 Decompilation and Round-Trip Editing The decompiler reconstructs DSL source text from an existing RouterConfig: 1. Plugin template extraction: Plugins used by multiple routes are automatically factored into top-level PLUGIN templates; route-local plugins remain inline. 2. Rule tree reconstruction: The RuleCombination tree in each decision is walked recursively to reconstruct the Boolean expression with proper AND/OR/NOT operators and parenthesization. 3. Signal type inference: Signal references in rule nodes are matched against the configurationšs signal lists to recover the original signal type keywords. This enables a migration path: existing YAML configurations can be decompiled to DSL, edited in the more concise syntax, and recompiled to any target format. The round-trip prop-compile decompile compileerty (DSL ..... RouterConfig ....... DSL ..... RouterConfig . . RouterConfig) is validated by extensive test suites including idempotency and double-round-trip tests. 6.7 Three-Level Validation The validator operates on the resolved AST (before compilation) and produces diagnostics at three severity levels: 1. Error (Level 1): Syntax errors detected during parsingčmalformed blocks, unex.pected tokens, missing delimiters. The block-granular error recovery ensures that errors in one block do not prevent analysis of subsequent blocks. 2. Warning (Level 2): Reference resolution issuesča WHEN clause references a signal name not defined in any SIGNAL block, or a PLUGIN reference has no matching template. The validator performs fuzzy matching on undefined signal names and suggests corrections via QuickFix annotations (e.g., ędid you mean math?ė fora reference to mth). 3. Constraint (Level 3): Semantic constraint violationsčembedding thresholds out.side [0, 1], port numbers outside valid ranges, negative route priorities, unknown algorithm or signal types. These catch logical errors that are syntactically valid but semantically incorrect. Figure 13 illustrates the three-level diagnostic architecture. This scheme provides IDE-like progressive feedback, enabling both batch validation (CLI validate command) and interactive authoring with incremental diagnostics. Level 1 č Error: Syntax errors, malformed blocks, unexpected tokens Level 2 č Warning: Undefined signal refs, missing plugins (+ fuzzy QuickFix) Level 3 č Constraint: Thresholds ./ [0, 1], invalid ports, unknown types 6.8 DSL as Instruction Set and Agent-Based Policy Synthesis The configuration language can be understood as the instruction set of the neural-symbolic inference engine. Just as a CPUšs instruction set defines the space of programs that can exe.cute on the hardware, the DSL defines the space of routing policies that can be instantiated on the signal-decision-plugin architecture. The functional completeness result of Section 4 guarantees that this instruction set is universal: any routing policy ╣ : {0, 1}N .M is expressible. This framing transforms the problem of configuring the router into a program synthesis problem (Figure 14): given a natural-language specification of routing requirements (ęroute math queries to the math model, enforce PII filtering for healthcare queriesė), synthesize a valid DSL configuration that implements the specification. This is precisely the class of prob.lems that code-generation agentsčLLMs fine-tuned or prompted for program synthesisčare designed to solve. The DSLšs formal grammar and type-safe compilation make it particularly suitable as the target language: the structured syntaxčwith explicit keywords, typed blocks, and a finite set of signal typesčconstrains the generation space far more tightly than free-form YAML, reducing the probability of syntactically valid but semantically incorrect configurations. The three-level validator provides immediate, machine-readable feedback that a coding agent can use to iteratively refine generated configurations. The connection to reinforcement learning is direct: the coding agentšs policy ╣.(config | spec) can be optimized via RLHF or rule-based reward Zhang et al. (2025a), where the reward signal is the downstream routing quality Q(r, m .) aggregated over a traffic distribution. This operates at a meta-level compared to prior work on RL-based routing Zhang et al. (2025a): rather than learning to route individual requests, the agent learns to write routing policies that generalize across request distributions. The DSL provides the structured action space that makes this meta-learning tractablečthe agent generates a finite, syntactically constrained configuration rather than an arbitrary neural network. 6.9 Synthesis: A Programmable Neural-Symbolic Inference Engine Taken together, the signal extraction layer (Section 3), decision engine (Section 4), and configuration language characterize the system as a programmable neural-symbolic inference engine: 1. Neural front-end: The signal extraction layer uses both heuristic and learned (neural) methods to produce a structured representationčanalogous to a hybrid embedding layer (Section 3.8). 2. Symbolic back-end: The decision engine applies Boolean logic over the struc.tured representationčanalogous to symbolic expert gating with formal verifiability (Section 4.8). 3. Programmable interface: The DSL configuration is the ęprogramė that specifies the inference behavior, and the functional completeness of the Boolean decision model guarantees universality of the program space. 4. Agent-compilable: The structured DSL enables LLM-based coding agents to serve as ęcompilersė from natural-language specifications to executable routing poli.cies, with RL-based optimization closing the loop. This perspective unifies the Shannon-theoretic foundation (information reduction + Boolean synthesis) with the modern ML landscape (embeddings + MoE gating + agent-based pro.gram synthesis), and suggests that the architecture occupies a principled point in the design space between fully neural routing systems (which sacrifice interpretability and editability) and fully manual rule systems (which sacrifice adaptivity and scalability). 7 Request-Time Safety: Jailbreak and PII Signals Request-time safety in our architecture is implemented as first-class signals, not as serial plugins. Jailbreak and PII detection run in the signal extraction layer (Section 3), evaluated in parallel alongside all other signal types (keyword, embedding, domain, etc.). Figure 15 illustrates how safety signals integrate with domain signals and decision rules. When a safety signal fires, the decision engine matches it to a decision that activates the fast_response plugin (Section 5), returning an immediate OpenAI-compatible response without contacting any upstream LLM. This signal-driven design has three key advantages: 1. Zero added latency: safety classifiers run concurrently with intent signals, so the wall-clock cost is max(safety, intent) rather than safety + intent. 2. Composability: safety signals can be combined with domain, keyword, or embedding signals in decision rules using AND/OR logicče.g., strict jailbreak detection only for financial queries. 3. Uniform observability: safety results appear as standard signal matches in headers (x-vsr-matched-jailbreak, x-vsr-matched-pii), traces, and the dashboard topology view. 7.1 Jailbreak Detection Jailbreak attacks attempt to override model safety instructions through adversarial prompt construction. Our detection pipeline addresses this as a classification problem with per-rule sensitivity control. Formulation. Given a text input x (the useršs latest message, or the full conversation history when include_history is enabled), a classifier gjb produces: gjb(x)=(y, c) .{benign, injection, jailbreak}. [0, 1] (20) A jailbreak signal rule with threshold . fires iff y =. benign and c │ .. Multiple rules at different thresholds can coexist, enabling decisions to reference different sensitivity levels. Classifier architecture. We support four inference backends with varying context-length and deployment characteristics: (1) BERT with LoRA adapters (standard context); (2) ModernBERT Warner et al. (2024) with Flash Attention; (3) mmBERT-32K with YaRN RoPE for 32K-token contexts; (4) external vLLM-served guardrail models for decoupled scaling. All local backends use the LoRA adapter architecture (Section 9), reducing model memory footprint. Per-rule sensitivity. Different signal rules configure different thresholds: a jailbreak_strict rule might use . =0.4 with full history analysis for financial endpoints, while a jailbreak_standard rule uses . =0.65 on the latest message only. Decisions then reference the appropriate rule by name, enabling context-aware security policies (e.g., strict detection only when the domain signal also matches ęeconomicsė). 7.2 Contrastive Jailbreak Detection While the BERT classifier excels at detecting single-turn jailbreak attempts, it can be evaded by multi-turn escalation (ęboiling frogė) attacks in which each individual message appears benign but the conversation progressively steers the model toward unsafe behavior. We in.troduce a contrastive embedding method that operates alongside the BERT classifier within the same jailbreak signal type. Knowledge base construction. Each contrastive rule defines two exemplar sets: a jail.break knowledge base Kjb containing known adversarial patterns (e.g., ęIgnore all previous instructionsė, ęYou are now DANė) and a benign knowledge base Kben containing represen.tative normal queries (e.g., ęWhat is the weather todayė, ęHelp me write an emailė). All KB embeddings are precomputed at initialization using a concurrent worker pool (identical to the complexity signalšs preloading strategy), so runtime cost is limited to embedding the incoming message and computing cosine similarities. Contrastive scoring. For each user message m, the contrastive score measures relative proximity to the jailbreak vs. benign exemplars: .(m) = max cos(m, j) . max cos(m, b) (21)j.Kjb b.Kben A positive . indicates the message is semantically closer to jailbreak patterns; a negative . indicates it is closer to benign patterns. The subtraction normalizes for the overall embed.ding similarity scale, making the threshold robust across different embedding models. Max-contrastive chain (multi-turn detection). When include_history is enabled, the system exploits the stateless nature of the OpenAI chat APIčeach request carries the full conversation history in the messages arrayčto evaluate every user message: Ų = max .(m) (22) m.Muser The rule fires when Ų │ . (default . =0.10). This max-pooling aggregation ensures that even if the current message is innocuous, the presence of any high-scoring turn in the history triggers detection. The approach is effective against gradual escalation because the attacker must include at least one semantically adversarial turn to steer the model, and that turn will produce a high contrastive score regardless of its position in the conversation. Integration with signal architecture. The contrastive method is selected via the method: contrastive field on a jailbreak rule, keeping the same signal type .jb and rule-name addressing used by the BERT classifier. This means contrastive rules participate fully in the decision enginešs Boolean logic. A typical deployment combines both methods: ź A BERT rule (jailbreak_standard, . =0.65) for fast, high-precision single-turn de.tection. ź A contrastive rule (jailbreak_multiturn, . =0.10, include_history: true) for multi-turn chain detection. ź A decision with OR logic fires if either method detects an attack, providing defense in depth. The embedding model is inherited from the global embedding_models configuration (con.sistent with the complexity signal), avoiding per-rule model specification. 7.3 PII Detection PII detection identifies personally identifiable information at the token level and enforces configurable allow/deny policies. Formulation. A token classifier gpii operates on the input sequence x =(x1,...,xT ) and produces BIO-tagged predictions: gpii(x)= (i, j, ., c) | span xi ...xj is PII type . with confidence c (23) where . .{person, email, phone, ssn, credit_card,...}. Policy model. Each PII signal rule specifies a threshold . and an optional allow-list Lallow. The rule fires when any detected entity (ß, ß, ., c) satisfies c │ . and . ./ Lallow. This per-rule policy enables differentiated enforcement: a pii_deny_all rule blocks all entity types, while a pii_allow_email rule permits email addresses for appointment booking in medical contexts. 7.4 Parallel Safety Evaluation Both jailbreak and PII classifiers launch as concurrent goroutines within the signal extraction layer, alongside all other signal evaluators. The wall-clock time is dominated by the slowest signal evaluator rather than the sum of safety and intent classifiers. Both use the LoRA adapter architecture (Section 9), and their results merge into the standard signal result S(r) consumed by the decision engine. When a safety signal fires, the matched decision activates its fast_response plugin, which short-circuits the pipeline and returns an OpenAI-compatible 200 OK response (supporting both streaming SSE and non-streaming JSON) without forwarding to any upstream model. 7.5 Composable Safety Design Placing safety detection in the signal layer enables a class of flexible security policies that are difficult to express in a serial plugin architecture. We highlight three patterns enabled by this design: Context-aware thresholds. A single deployment can define multiple jailbreak rules at different sensitivity levels (e.g., . =0.4 for strict, . =0.65 for standard). Decisions compose these with domain signals: a block_jb_finance decision uses the strict rule AND the ęeconomicsė domain signal, while a block_jb_general decision uses the standard rule alone. This provides differentiated security posture without separate deployments. Per-domain PII policies. Different domains require different PII handling: a healthcare endpoint may allow email and phone number for appointment booking while blocking SSN, Parallel Signal Extraction Figure 15: Signal-driven safety architecture. Safety classifiers (.jb,.pii) run in the signal layer in parallel with intent signals, adding zero marginal latency. Decision rules compose safety signals with domain signals using AND/OR logic, enabling context-aware policies (e.g., strict jailbreak detection only for finance, relaxed PII policy for healthcare). High-priority safety decisions activate the fast_response plugin to return an immediate 200 OK without contacting any upstream model. whereas a public chatbot blocks all PII types. Each PII signal rule carries its own allow-list, and decisions combine the appropriate rule with the relevant domain signal. This replaces a monolithic PII policy with a set of composable, domain-scoped rules. Graduated response. By defining multiple safety decisions at different priorities, the system can implement graduated responses: a high-confidence jailbreak (c │ 0.9) triggers an immediate block (priority 1001), while a moderate-confidence detection (0.4 ▓ c< 0.9) triggers a warning header without blocking (priority 500). The fast_response plugin handles blocking; a header-only decision allows the request to proceed with an observability annotation. This graduated model reduces false-positive impact while maintaining security coverage. 8 HaluGate: Gated Hallucination Detection Hallucinationčgenerating plausible but unsupported contentčis a fundamental limitation of autoregressive language models Manakul et al. (2023); Min et al. (2023). We introduce HaluGate, a three-stage pipeline (Figure 16) that addresses a key efficiency challenge: most queries (creative writing, code generation, brainstorming) do not require factual verification, yet naĢve hallucination detection incurs overhead on every response. 8.1 Design Rationale Existing approaches apply hallucination detection uniformly to all responses Manakul et al. (2023) or require multiple response samples Min et al. (2023). HaluGate introduces two innovations: (1) a gating stage that skips verification for non-factual queries, amortizing detection cost over the query distribution; and (2) a span-level detection and explanation pipeline that identifies which tokens are hallucinated and why, rather than providing only a binary judgment. no spans request path response path Figure 16: HaluGate three-stage gated pipeline. The Sentinel classifies queries on the request path; non-factual queries (40ą60%) skip verification entirely (dashed). For factual queries, the Detector identifies hallucinated spans in the model response, and the Explainer provides NLI-based diagnostics per span. 8.2 Three-Stage Pipeline Stage 1: Sentinel (Gating). A lightweight binary classifier gsent determines whether the query warrants factual verification: gsent(q) .{needs_fact_check, no_fact_check} (24) If gsent(q)= no_fact_check, Stages 2ą3 are skipped entirely. The Sentinel operates on the request text and is implemented as a LoRA-adapted classifier sharing the base model with other signal extractors. In practice, 40ą60% of queries are classified as non-factual, proportionally reducing the average detection cost. The Sentinel also serves dual duty as the fact_check signal in the signal extraction layer (Section 3), enabling decisions to incorporate factual grounding into routing logic. Stage 2: Detector (Span Identification). A token-level classifier gdet identifies halluci.nated spans in the model response:  gdet(q, c,a)= (i, j, cij ) | ai ...aj is unsupported by context c (25) where q is the user query, c is the grounding context (user-provided context and tool-call results), a is the assistantšs response, and (i, j, cij ) denotes a flagged span with confidence. When tool-calling is present, tool execution results provide high-quality ground truth: database query results, API responses, and calculations serve as authoritative context c, substantially improving detection precision. Stage 3: Explainer (NLI Classification). For each flagged span (i, j), a Natural Lan.guage Inference (NLI) model Williams et al. (2018) classifies the relationship between the span and the grounding context: gnli(ai:j, c) .{entailment, contradiction, neutral} (26) This distinguishes between content that contradicts the context (definitive hallucination) and content that is merely unsupported (potential hallucination), providing actionable di.agnostics. 8.3 Cost Analysis Let pfactual be the fraction of queries requiring factual verification, Csent, Cdet, Cnli be the costs of each stage, and k° be the average number of flagged spans. The expected cost per query is:  E[Cost]= Csent + pfactual ß Cdet + k° ß Cnli (27) Since the Sentinel is a lightweight LoRA-adapted classifier (Section 9) that runs concurrently with other signal extractors, its wall-clock cost is largely hidden behind other ML signals. For a workload with pfactual =0.5, the gating stage reduces the expected Detector and Explainer cost by approximately 50% compared to applying full detection to all responses. Table 1: HaluGate action policies upon hallucination detection Action  Semantics  block  Reject the response; return an error to the client.  Appropriate for high-stakes factual applications.  header  Propagate detection metadata via HTTP headers,  enabling downstream policy enforcement by the  client or API gateway.  body  Prepend a warning to the response body, alerting users to potential inaccuracies.  none  Log detection results without modifying the  re. sponse.  Useful for monitoring and threshold cali. bration.  8.4 Action Policies HaluGate supports four configurable response actions: The progressive architecture enables incremental deployment: organizations begin with Sentinel-only gating (signal-layer integration at minimal cost), add the Detector for span-level monitoring, and enable the Explainer for full diagnostic output. 9 LoRA-Based MoM Model Family Signal-driven routing requires multiple classification tasks on the critical path of every re.quest. NaĢvely, each task requires a separate fine-tuned model, creating a memory scaling problem. We describe the LoRA-based architecture that addresses this and the purpose-built model family trained for semantic routing. 9.1 Problem: Linear Memory Scaling Let n denote the number of active classification tasks (domain, jailbreak, PII, fact-check, feedback, modality). With independently fine-tuned models, the total model memory is: Mindep = n ß|.base| (28) where |.base| is the parameter count of a single base model. For n =6 tasks with a 150M.parameter base model, this requires storing and loading six full model copies (.900M pa.rameters total)ča significant memory burden, especially in GPU-constrained environments. Additionally, managing n independent model checkpoints complicates deployment, version.ing, and updates. 9.2 Solution: Single Base Model with LoRA Adapters Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) Hu et al. (2022) represents task-specific weight modifications as low-rank decompositions: . Wi = W +ŲWi = W + BiAi,Bi . Rd.r ,Ai . Rr.d (29) where W is the shared base weight, r . d is the adapter rank, and BiAi is the task-specific perturbation. The aggregate model memory becomes: nX MLoRA = |.base| +2rd = |.base| + n ß 2rd (30) i=1 With rank r = 32 and hidden dimension d = 768, each adapter adds 2 . 32 . 768 = 49,152 parameters (.0.02% of the base model). For n =6, total adapter overhead is .295K parametersčnegligible compared to the 150M-parameter base. Memory reduction. MLoRA |.base| + n ß 2rd 1 = ┼ for 2nrd .|.base| (31)Mindep n ß|.base| n At n =6, this yields .6. memory reduction: one 150M-parameter model plus six tiny adapters instead of six full copies. 9.3 Inference Architecture Each classification task proceeds as a full forward pass through the base model with the task-specific LoRA perturbation applied (Figure 17): 1. Load: A single base model is loaded into GPU/CPU memory at startup. Each LoRA adapter (a pair of small matrices per adapted layer) is loaded alongside it. 2. Inference: For each classification task i, the base model runs a forward pass with .adapter išs weights merged: W = W + BiAi. Each task still requires its own i forward pass. 3. Parallelism: Multiple classification tasks execute concurrently via parallel thread.s/goroutines. Wall-clock time is determined by the slowest classifier, not the sum. Note that LoRA does not eliminate the per-task forward passčeach adapter requires a full inference through the modified model. The primary benefit is memory efficiency: deploying six classifiers requires the memory footprint of approximately one model rather than six, and all adapters can be updated independently without reloading the base model. 9.4 MoM Model Family We train a family of purpose-built models (MoM: Mixture-of-Models) optimized for routing classification tasks: Table 2: MoM model family. All models share a common base (ModernBERT Warner et al. (2024) or mmBERT-32K) and are distributed as LoRA adapters. Model  Task  Training Data  mom-domain  Domain classification  MMLU categories  mom-pii mom-jailbreak mom-sentinel  PII token classification Prompt injection detection Fact-check gating  Presidio-annotated corpora Adversarial prompt datasets Factual vs. creative queries  mom-detector  Hallucination detection  Annotated LLM outputs  mom-explainer mom-feedback  NLI explanation User feedback analysis  NLI benchmarks Conversation annotations  mom-modality mom-embedding mom-toolcall  Modality classification Semantic embeddings Tool selection  DiffusionDB + text corpora Contrastive pre-training Function-calling datasets  mom-intent  User intent classification  Customer support dialogues  The key benefit of distributing these as LoRA adapters rather than independent models is operational simplicity: a single base model binary serves all ten tasks, adapters can be hot-swapped without reloading the base, and new tasks can be added by training a new adapter without retraining or redistributing the base model. 9.5 Training Methodology All LoRA adapters are trained using PEFT Mangrulkar et al. (2022) with the following protocol: ź Base model: ModernBERT or mmBERT-32K (for long-context tasks). ź Adapter configuration: Rank r .{16, 32, 64}, applied to query and value projection matrices. ź Training: Task-specific datasets with standard cross-entropy loss. ź Export: Both LoRA-only (separate adapter files for hot-swapping) and merged (single model file for simplified deployment) formats. The modality classifier, for instance, is trained on a balanced mixture of DiffusionDB (image generation prompts), OASST2, Alpaca, and Dolly (text generation), achieving three-class classification (autoregressive, diffusion, both) with .0.02% trainable parameters relative to the base model. 10 Semantic Model Selection The core routing innovation is semantic model selection: once the decision engine matches a routing decision d. , the system analyzes the requestšs semantic contentčits embedding, domain, complexity, and interaction historyčto select the most cost-effective model from the decisionšs candidate set. Unlike static routing or single-criterion difficulty classifiers, se.mantic selection operates over the full signal context produced by the signal engine, enabling cost-quality optimization that respects per-decision privacy and safety constraints. We integrate thirteen algorithms within a unified interface, enabling systematic comparison and hybrid combinations across deployment scenarios. 10.1 Problem Setting Given query embedding eq . Rd , domain category z .{1,...,C}, candidate models Md. = {m1,...,mK } with associated costs {c1,...,cK }, and quality estimators, the se.mantic selection problem is: . m = arg max Quality(eq, z, mk; .) . . ß Cost(mk) (32) mk.Md. where . │ 0 is a cost-sensitivity parameter and . represents algorithm-specific parame.ters. The per-decision candidate set Md. is critical: privacy-constrained decisions restrict candidates to compliant models, while cost-optimized decisions include a broader pool with aggressive cost weighting. We categorize algorithms into families based on their selection mechanism (Figure 18). 10.2 Rating-Based Selection .Static. Each model carries a pre-configured quality score sk; selection is m = arg maxk sk. Serves as a deterministic baseline. Elo Rating (adapted from RouteLLM Ong et al. (2024)). Models maintain Elo ratings Rk updated from pairwise user preference feedback. Selection probability follows the Bradley.Terry model: P (mi . mj)= 1 (33)1 + 10(Rj.Ri)/400 Models are sampled proportional to their expected win rate against the candidate pool. Ratings are updated online as user feedback arrives. 10.3 Embedding-Based Selection RouterDC Chen et al. (2024). Dual contrastive learning trains query and model encoders to produce embeddings in a shared space. Selection maximizes cosine similarity: . m = arg max cos(eq, emk ) (34) mk.Md . The contrastive training objective encourages queries to be close to their best-performing modelšs embedding and distant from poorly-performing models. Hybrid Hu et al. (2024). Combines Elo ratings, embedding similarity, and cost in a weighted score: score(mk)= . ß R„k + . ß cos(eq, emk )+ . ß (1 . c„k) (35) where R„k and c„k are normalized ratings and costs, and . + . + . =1 are configurable weights. 10.4 Cascading Selection AutoMix Aggarwal et al. (2023). Formulated as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP). Models are ordered by capability m1 . m2 . ßßß . mK . The cascade: 1. Generate response ak with current model mk (starting from k =1, the cheapest). 2. Self-verify: estimate response quality q÷k using mk itself. 3. If q÷k │ .k, accept ak; otherwise, escalate to mk+1. The expected cost is: Kk.1Y E[C]= Ck ß (1 . P (÷qj │ .j )) (36) k=1 j=1 where P (÷qj │ .j ) is the probability that model mj passes self-verification. This naturally trades off cost against quality. 10.5 Classical ML Selection (i) (i) .(i)These methods train on routing records {(eq ,z ,m ,q(i))} where q(i) is a quality score. Feature vectors combine embeddings and domain information: f =[eq . Rd; onehot(z) .{0, 1}C ] (37) KNN. k-nearest neighbor search with Ball Tree indexing. Quality-weighted majority voting:X ..(i)(i)m = arg max 1[m = m] ß q (38) m i.kNN(f) KMeans. Assigns queries to pre-computed clusters; selects the best model for the assigned cluster based on a combined quality-latency score:. m = arg max . ß quality(m, zcluster) . (1 . .) ß latency(m) (39) m SVM. Multi-class SVM with RBF or linear kernel, trained to classify feature vectors directly into model selections. MLP. A feed-forward neural network (two hidden layers with ReLU activation) mapping f to a softmax distribution over candidate models: P (mk | f)= softmax W2 ß ReLU(W1f + b1)+ b2 (40)k The MLP is implemented in the GPU-accelerated Candle runtime for low-latency inference. Round 1 (b1=4) optionally compact responses before prompt construction Figure 19: ReMoM execution flow with breadth schedule b = [4, 2]. Round 1 distributes 4 parallel calls across models (mA, mB, mC ); responses are (optionally compacted and) assembled into a synthesis prompt. Round 2 sends 2 parallel synthesis calls. A final round (b3 =1, auto-appended) produces the single output. Each synthesis prompt includes the original query and all previous-round responses as numbered references, delegating quality judgment to the synthesizing LLM. 10.6 Reinforcement Learning Selection Thompson Sampling Thompson (1933). Each model maintains a Beta prior: .k . Beta(.k,.k) (41) .Selection samples from each posterior and picks the maximum: m = arg maxk .k. Param.eters (.k,.k) are updated from user preference feedback, naturally balancing exploration and exploitation. GMTRouter Xie et al. (2025). Models multi-turn user-query-model interactions as a heterogeneous graph. Graph neural network message passing captures complex interaction patterns:  h(l+1) = AGG {h(l) | u .N (v)} (42)vu where nodes represent users, queries, and models, and edges encode historical routing out.comes. 10.7 Latency-Aware Selection Latency-Aware. Selects the model with the best observed latency using percentile-based Time-per-Output-Token (TPOT) and Time-to-First-Token (TTFT) statistics collected at runtime. For each candidate model mk, the selector computes a normalized latency score: 1 X perc (mk)psk = (43)|P | minj perc (mj )pp.P where P .{TPOT, TTFT} is the set of configured performance metrics and perc (mk) isp .the observed percentile value for model mk on metric p. Selection minimizes this score: m = arg mink sk. This enables adaptive routing that responds to real-time backend performance degradation without requiring explicit latency thresholds as signal conditions. 10.8 Multi-Round Reasoning (ReMoM) The ReMoM (Reasoning for Mixture of Models) strategy extends single-shot selection to multi-round parallel reasoning with LLM-driven synthesis. Inspired by PaCoRe Zhang et al. (2025b) but generalized to heterogeneous model pools, ReMoM executes a breadth schedule of decreasing parallelism across rounds, where each subsequent round synthesizes the outputs of the previous round via prompted LLM calls (Figure 19). Breadth schedule. The operator specifies a breadth schedule b =[b1,b2,...,bR] defining the number of parallel model calls per round. A final synthesis round with bR+1 =1 is automatically appended, yielding a total of R +1 rounds. For example, b = [32, 4] produces three rounds: 32 parallel calls, then 4 parallel calls each synthesizing the 32 responses, then a single final call synthesizing the 4 responses. Model distribution. At each round, br calls are distributed among the candidate models Md. according to one of three strategies: (1) equal: calls are distributed evenly across all candidates with round-robin remainder allocation; (2) weighted: calls are distributed pro.portionally to model weights (currently equivalent to equal distribution); (3) first_only: all br calls target a single model with different random seeds, providing PaCoRe-compatible single-model diversity. Calls within each round execute concurrently with configurable con.currency limits. LLM-driven synthesis. After collecting responses from round r, the system constructs a synthesis prompt for round r +1 using a configurable Go text/template. The default template presents the original query alongside all previous-round responses as numbered references, instructing the next-round model(s) to ęanalyze these references and provide your own comprehensive solution.ė When reasoning content is available (e.g., from models supporting extended thinking), the template additionally includes each referencešs chain-of.thought reasoning. This approach delegates quality judgment entirely to the synthesizing LLM rather than relying on explicit scoring or weighted aggregation. Response compaction. To manage prompt length across rounds, responses can be com.pacted before inclusion in synthesis prompts. Two strategies are supported: full (no com.paction, the default) and last_n_tokens (retaining only the final N tokens, estimated at .4 characters per token). This is particularly important for high-breadth schedules where concatenating all responses would exceed context limits. Execution flow. The complete algorithm proceeds as: 1. Schedule construction: Append [1] to the user-specified breadth schedule b. 2. Round 1 (parallel generation): Distribute b1 calls across candidate models; execute concurrently with temperature T (default 1.0) for response diversity. 3. Rounds 2 ...R+1 (synthesis): For each subsequent round, build a synthesis prompt from the previous roundšs (optionally compacted) responses, distribute br calls, and execute concurrently. 4. Final output: Return the single response from the final round (bR+1 =1). ReMoM is particularly effective when model capabilities are uncertain or when the task benefits from diverse perspectives (e.g., complex reasoning, multi-faceted analysis). The breadth schedule provides fine-grained control over the costąquality tradeoff: higher initial breadth increases diversity at the cost of additional LLM calls, while the funneling structure ensures convergence to a single synthesized answer. 10.9 Unified Selection Interface All thirteen algorithms implement a common interface: .Select :(eq, z, M, .) . (m ,c) (44) returning the selected model and a confidence score. This uniformity enables: (1) per-decision algorithm selectiončdifferent routing decisions can use different selection algo.rithms, allowing cost-optimized decisions to use cascading (AutoMix) while quality-sensitive decisions use embedding-based (RouterDC) selection; (2) A/B testing across algorithms on live traffic; (3) ensemble methods that combine multiple selectors. 10.10 Cost-Aware Selection in Multi-Provider Settings In multi-endpoint deployments where the same logical model may be served by different providers at different price points, the selection algorithms operate in conjunction with the endpoint router (Section 12.3). The selection algorithm chooses the best model based on semantic analysis, and the endpoint router resolves it to the most cost-effective provider endpoint. This two-stage process separates quality optimization (which model is best for this query?) from cost optimization (which provider endpoint offers the best price for this model?), enabling fine-grained cost management across heterogeneous multi-cloud deploy.ments. 11 Multi-Runtime ML Inference The routing system requires low-latency ML inference for signal extraction, classification, and embedding computationčall on the critical path of every request. We describe the multi-runtime architecture that addresses the tension between inference speed, hardware flexibility, and model diversity. 11.1 Design Constraints Three constraints shape the inference architecture: 1. Latency: Signal extraction must complete within the tail latency budget of the routing system (target: <100ms for all signals combined). 2. Hardware heterogeneity: Deployments range from GPU-equipped data centers to CPU-only edge nodes. 3. Model diversity: Different tasks require different model architectures (sequence classification, token classification, NLI, embeddings, MLP). 11.2 Four-Runtime Architecture We implement four inference runtimes, each optimized for different hardware and task pro.files, all exposed to the Go routing process via C FFI and CGo (Figure 20): Table 3: Inference runtime characteristics Runtime  Target  Tasks  Framework  Hardware  Candle  GPU  Classification, LoRA, MLP  HF  (CUDA),  Candle Hugging  CPU  Face (2024)  Linfa  CPU only  KNN, KMeans, SVM  Linfa Linfa  Contributors  (2024)  ONNX  CPU, GPU  Embeddings  ONNX  RT  Runtime Microsoft  (2024)  NLP  CPU only  BM25, N-gram matching  bm25 +  Binding  ngrammatic  (Rust)  All runtimes are compiled as Rust shared libraries (.so/.a) and linked to the Go routing process via CGo. This eliminates Python runtime overhead, GIL contention, and inter.process communication latency that would arise from serving models in separate Python processes. 11.3 Candle Runtime: GPU-Accelerated Classification The Candle runtime handles all transformer-based classification tasks, including LoRA adapter loading and inference (Section 9). Supported architectures. BERT Devlin et al. (2019), ModernBERT Warner et al. (2024) (with Flash Attention and GeGLU), mmBERT-32K (YaRN RoPE for 32K context), De-BERTa v3 (NLI), and feed-forward MLPs (model selection). NLP Binding libnlp_binding.so BM25 (Okapi) scoring N-gram fuzzy match AND/OR/NOR rules Keyword signal Figure 20: Four-runtime ML inference architecture. The Go routing process links to four Rust shared libraries via CGo/C FFI. Each runtime is specialized for a different class of ML workload, avoiding Python overhead on the critical path. Optimization features. Flash Attention 2 kernels reduce attention memory from O(n2) to O(n) and improve throughput. Optional Intel MKL integration for CPU deployments. LoRA adapter hot-loading enables runtime model updates without restart. 11.4 ModernBERT-base-32k: Extended Context Window The Candle runtime supports ModernBERT-base-32k, extending the context window from 512 tokens (BERT-base) to 32,768 tokens via YaRN (Yet another RoPE extensioN) scal.ing Peng et al. (2023). This enables signal extraction from long documents and multi-turn conversations that exceed the traditional 512-token limit. Architecture and scaling. ModernBERT-base-32k uses Rotary Position Embeddings (RoPE) with YaRN scaling to extend the base modelšs 8,192-token context to 32K tokens. The model maintains compatibility with existing LoRA adapters trained on BERT-base, enabling seamless migration without retraining classifier heads. Flash Attention 2 provides memory-efficient attention computation, reducing memory requirements from O(n2) to O(n) for long sequences. Performance characteristics. Empirical benchmarks on NVIDIA L4 GPU (23GB VRAM) demonstrate reliable performance for context lengths up to 8K tokens: ź 1K tokens: p50 latency .94ms at C=1, .970ms at C=10 (100% success rate) ź 4K tokens: p50 latency .955ms at C=1, .9,389ms at C=10 (93% success rate, 7 OOM errors) ź 8K tokens: p50 latency .3,525ms at C=1, fails at C=10 due to insufficient GPU memory For sequences exceeding 32K tokens, automatic chunking with configurable overlap (de.fault 128 tokens) enables processing of arbitrarily long documents while preserving context continuity. Hardware requirements. Production deployments for 1Ką8K tokens require a GPU with │23GB VRAM (e.g., NVIDIA L4, A10G). Full 32K token support and high concurrency (C=50+) require │40GB VRAM (e.g., NVIDIA A100). CPU inference is supported but incurs significant latency penalties (.45. slower for 512 tokens). Backward compatibility. The integration maintains full backward compatibility with existing BERT-base workflows. Sequences ▓512 tokens exhibit no performance degrada.tion, and existing LoRA adapters (domain classification, PII detection, jailbreak detection) function without modification. 11.5 Linfa Runtime: CPU ML Inference Classical ML model selection algorithms (KNN, KMeans, SVM) are served by the Linfa runtime. These algorithms operate on pre-computed feature vectors and do not require GPU acceleration, making Linfašs lightweight CPU implementation ideal. Training-inference split. Models are trained in Python (scikit-learn, custom implemen.tations) and serialized to JSON. The Rust runtime loads serialized models at startup and performs inference-only computation. This decouples the training environment (Python, GPU-optional) from the inference environment (Rust, CPU-only), enabling simpler deploy.ment. 11.6 ONNX Runtime: Efficient Embeddings Embedding computation is served by ONNX Runtime, optimized for the mmBERT-Embed.32K model with 2D Matryoshka representation learning Kusupati et al. (2022). 2D Matryoshka trade-offs. The architecture supports two-dimensional quality-latency trade-offs: ź Layer early-exit: Extract embeddings from intermediate layers (6, 11, 16, or 22 out of 22), achieving .3ą4. speedup at layer 6 with modest quality degradation. ź Dimension truncation: Reduce embedding dimension from 768 to 64, 128, 256, or 512, reducing memory and computation for similarity search. For the .150M parameter embedding model, CPU inference with 2D Matryoshka (layer 11, dimension 256) achieves latency comparable to GPU inference on the full model, making GPU optional for embedding computation. 11.7 NLP Binding Runtime: Keyword Classification The NLP Binding runtime handles BM25 and N-gram keyword matching for the keyword signal type, complementing the ML-based classifiers served by Candle. Unlike the neural runtimes, NLP Binding implements statistical text matching algorithms that require no model weights or GPU: BM25 (Okapi). The BM25 classifier uses the Rust bm25 crate to compute term-frequencyą inverse-document-frequency scores between query text and keyword rules. Each rule spec.ifies a set of keywords, a Boolean operator (AND/OR/NOR), a score threshold, and case-sensitivity. A keyword is considered matched when its BM25 relevance score exceeds the configured threshold. N-gram fuzzy matching. The N-gram classifier uses the ngrammatic crate to perform fuzzy string matching via character n-gram overlap (default: trigrams, Jaccard similarity). This enables matching despite typos and morphological variationče.g., "urgnet" matches the keyword "urgent" when the similarity exceeds the configured threshold. FFI design. The binding follows the same conventions as candle-binding: Rust #[repr(C)] structs, #[no_mangle] pub extern "C" fn exports, CString-based string passing, and explicit free functions for Rust-allocated memory. The Go side wraps each classifier as a handle-based API (BM25Classifier, NgramClassifier) with lifecycle man.agement (New, AddRule, Classify, Free). Thread safety is provided by Rust Mutex-guarded global state with atomic handle generation. 11.8 Runtime Selection Strategy The routing system selects runtimes based on deployment configuration. The NLP Binding is always active when keyword signal rules use bm25 or ngram methods: ź GPU available: Candle (classification + LoRA) + ONNX (embeddings) + Linfa (ML selection) + NLP Binding (keyword). ź CPU only: Candle with MKL (classification) + ONNX with early-exit (embeddings) + Linfa (ML selection) + NLP Binding (keyword). ź Minimal: ONNX (embeddings) + Linfa (ML selection) + NLP Binding (keyword), with classification delegated to external vLLM-served models. fast resp / cache Request S(r) d . path Response path Figure 21: Bidirectional request processing pipeline aligned with the three-layer architecture. Request path (top, left.right): the signal layer parses and extracts S(r), including safety signals (jailbreak, PII); the decision layer evaluates Boolean formulas to select d.; the plugin chain executes pre-processing (fast response for safety enforcement, caching, RAG, memory), model selection, and endpoint routing. A cache hit or fast response short-circuits the pipeline (dashed). Response path (bottom, right.left): the same three layers operate in the same orderčthe signal layer extracts response-side signals (token usage, HaluGate hallucination scores, streaming latency metrics); the decision layer evaluates quality gating and cache eligibility; plugins perform format translation, cache writes, and API translation. 12 Request Processing Pipeline We implement the routing system as an Envoy Envoy Proxy Authors (2024b) External Processor (ExtProc) Envoy Proxy Authors (2024a), enabling transparent interception of LLM API traffic without client-side modifications. Figure 21 illustrates the bidirectional request processing pipeline. This section describes the pipeline architecture, multi-provider routing, the Responses API integration, and the pluggable authorization factory. 12.1 Transparent Interception via ExtProc The Envoy ExtProc protocol Envoy Proxy Authors (2024a) establishes a bidirectional gRPC stream between the proxy and the routing service for each HTTP request. Envoy invokes the processor at four phasesčrequest headers, request body, response headers, response bodyčand the processor responds with mutations (header modifications, body rewrites) or immediate responses (short-circuiting the backend). This architecture provides two key advantages: (1) transparency: clients send standard OpenAI-compatible API requests to the proxy endpoint with no awareness of the routing layer; and (2) composability: the router coexists with other Envoy filters (rate limiting, authentication, load balancing) in the standard filter chain. 12.2 Request Body Pipeline The request body phase implements the core routing logic as a sequential pipeline: parse signals . ) decide .pre select route. .. r .... r ..... S(r .... d . ....... m .... e (45) The stages execute in strict order: (1) API translation (Responses API . Chat Comple.tions if applicable, see Section 12.4); (2) request parsing and provider detection; (3) signal extraction and decision evaluation (Sections 3 and 4); (4) fast response check (Section 5)č if the matched decision activates the fast_response plugin (e.g., for safety enforcement), the pipeline terminates with an immediate OpenAI-compatible response; (5) semantic cache lookup (Section 5)čcache hits terminate the pipeline with an immediate response; (6) RAG context injection (Section 13); (7) modality routing (text vs. diffusion); (8) memory re.trieval (Section 13); (9) model selection (Section 10), system prompt injection, and header mutation; (10) multi-endpoint resolution and provider-specific auth injection (Sections 12.3 and 12.5). 12.3 Multi-Endpoint and Multi-Provider Routing Production deployments often span multiple model backends across different providers and geographic regions. The system supports multi-endpoint routing as a first-class concept: Definition 7 (Endpoint Topology). An endpoint topology E = {(ei,wi,pi,.i)}L definesP i=1 L endpoints, each with a weight wi . (0, 1] (normalized: i wi =1), a provider type pi .P, and an auth profile .i. ..Once semantic model selection identifies a target model m , the endpoint router resolves m .to a concrete endpoint e from the set of endpoints serving that model. Weighted random selection with sticky session affinity distributes load proportionally. Failover cascades to the next-weighted endpoint on backend errors. Each endpoint may use a different provider (e.g., the same logical model ęgpt-4oė served by both OpenAI and Azure OpenAI). The system performs provider-specific protocol translation transparently: ź OpenAI / Azure OpenAI: Native Chat Completions and Responses API formats. ź Anthropic: Translation between OpenAI message schema and Anthropic Messages API (system prompt handling, tool use mapping). ź Bedrock / Vertex AI: Cloud-provider-specific request wrapping, authentication (SigV4 for AWS, OAuth for GCP), and response unwrapping. ź Gemini: Conversion between OpenAI function-calling schema and Gemini tool declara.tions. ź vLLM / Local: Direct OpenAI-compatible passthrough to self-hosted vLLM instances. This abstraction allows routing decisions to reference models by capability (ębest coding modelė) rather than by provider-specific endpoint, and allows the same decision configuration to operate across different deployment topologies. 12.4 OpenAI Responses API Support The system provides full support for the OpenAI Responses API, which extends Chat Com.pletions with stateful multi-turn conversation management. The Responses API introduces previous_response_id chaining: each response carries a unique identifier, and subsequent requests can reference it to maintain conversation context without the client retransmitting the full message history. The routing system handles this by: 1. Inbound translation: Responses API requests (with input field and previous_response_id) are normalized to Chat Completions format for signal ex.traction and decision evaluation, which operate on the unified internal representation. 2. State management: Conversation history is stored in the persistent memory layer (Section 13), keyed by response ID, enabling context retrieval across turns. 3. Outbound translation: Chat Completions responses from backends are wrapped in Responses API format (with id, output array, usage breakdown) before returning to the client. 4. Routing consistency: The decision engine can optionally pin conversation turns to the same model to avoid mid-conversation quality shifts. This translation layer is transparent to both the signal engine and the downstream model backends, enabling all routing, safety, and caching features to operate identically on Re.sponses API and Chat Completions traffic. 12.5 Authorization Factory Multi-provider deployments require diverse authentication mechanisms. The system imple.ments a pluggable authorization factory that abstracts auth concerns from routing logic: Definition 8 (Auth Provider). An auth provider . :(Request, Endpoint) . Headers . is a function that enriches outbound request headers with provider-appropriate credentials. The factory supports multiple auth provider types: ź API Key: Static bearer tokens or API keys, optionally per-endpoint, with header name customization (e.g., Authorization, x-api-key, api-key). ź OAuth2 / OIDC: Token acquisition with automatic refresh, supporting client creden.tials and authorization code flows. ź Cloud IAM: AWS SigV4 signing for Bedrock, Google service account tokens for Vertex AI, Azure AD tokens for Azure OpenAI. ź Passthrough: Forwarding the clientšs original credentials to the backend, used for de.ployments where the client authenticates directly. ź Custom: User-defined auth plugins registered at startup, enabling integration with en.terprise identity providers (LDAP, SAML, custom JWT issuers). The auth factory is invoked after decision evaluation and model selection, injecting provider-specific credentials into the outbound request headers. This separation ensures that routing decisions are auth-agnostic: the decision engine selects models based on capability and cost, and the auth layer handles the mechanics of reaching each provideršs endpoint. The authz signal type in the signal engine (Section 3) is complementary but distinct: it per.forms inbound authorization (verifying that the requesting user or API key has permission to access specific models or decisions), while the auth factory handles outbound authentication (proving the routeršs identity to backend providers). 12.6 Response Body Pipeline The response path performs: (1) token usage extraction for cost accounting; (2) for.mat translation (provider-specific . OpenAI format); (3) streaming metrics computation (TTFT, TPOT); (4) hallucination detection via HaluGate (Section 8); (5) semantic cache writes for cache misses; (6) Responses API translation (Chat Completions . Responses API format, if applicable). 12.7 Concurrency Model Each gRPC stream (one per HTTP request) runs in an independent goroutine, processing its four phases sequentially. Within a request, signal extraction launches parallel coroutines for independent classifiers. Shared state (classifier models, cache backends, configuration, auth token caches) is read concurrently by all active streams, with synchronization limited to cache writes, auth token refreshes, and metric updates. 13 Memory and Retrieval-Augmented Generation Production routing systems must support multi-turn conversations with persistent context and knowledge-augmented responses. We describe the memory and RAG subsystems that operate as plugins within the routing pipeline. 13.1 Persistent Memory The memory system maintains user-scoped knowledge across conversation sessions, enabling personalized routing and context-aware responses. Figure 22 illustrates the full memory lifecycle. Memory storage. Each conversation turn is stored directly as an episodic chunkčno ex.ternal LLM is required. The user message and assistant response are concatenated into a Q:/A: block, sanitized (UTF-8 validation, 16KB cap per entry), and embedded. A lightweight entropy gate discards turns that carry no retrievable signalčgreetings, acknowl.edgments, and short one-word repliesčbefore embedding, reducing index pollution. Every s turns a session-level sliding-window chunk spanning the last w turns is additionally stored (defaults: s=3, w=5), creating overlapping windows so facts near turn boundaries co-occur in at least one chunkčimproving multi-hop retrieval coverage. Retrieval gating. Not every query benefits from memory retrieval. A lightweight heuristic determines whether memory search is warranted by filtering out general fact-check queries, tool-augmented requests, and simple greetings, avoiding unnecessary embedding lookups and reducing latency for queries where personal context is irrelevant. Retrieval. At query time, relevant memories are retrieved via the hybrid search pipeline (vector similarity, BM25, and n-gram matching) over the useršs memory store. An op.tional query-rewriting step reformulates the useršs query for improved retrieval recall. Adap.tive thresholding adjusts the similarity cutoff based on retrieval mode, preventing cosine-calibrated thresholds from silently discarding all RRF-scored results. Post-retrieval filtering. Retrieved memories pass through a composable Reflection-Gate before context injection: 1. Safety: a regex block-list prevents prompt-injection payloads from being surfaced. 2. Recency decay: memories are weighted by recency, prioritizing recent context. 3. Deduplication: near-duplicate entries (high Jaccard similarity) are collapsed to a single representative. 4. Budget: the final set is capped at a configurable count to bound injected context length. Filtered context is injected as a separate conversation message positioned after system in.structions but before user turns, following the context-injection pattern of the OpenAI Agents SDK. Background consolidation. A scheduled background job merges semantically related memories using greedy single-linkage clustering over word-level Jaccard similarity. Memories within each cluster are replaced by a single deduplicated summary entry, reducing store redundancy and improving retrieval precision over time. 13.2 Retrieval-Augmented Generation The RAG plugin retrieves relevant documents from vector stores and injects them as context before model invocation. Indexing pipeline. Documents are chunked (configurable size and overlap), embedded using the shared embedding model (Section 11), and indexed in a vector store. Hybrid retrieval. Pure vector search can miss lexically relevant results when the embed.ding model underweights rare terms. We implement a three-signal hybrid retrieval pipeline (Figure 23) that scores each candidate chunk along three axes: 1. Vector similarity: cosine similarity from the embedding index (already in [0, 1]). 2. BM25: an Okapi BM25 inverted index built over chunk contents provides keyword-level relevance, with configurable k1 (term-frequency saturation, default 1.2) and b (length normalization, default 0.75) parameters. 3. N-gram Jaccard: character n-gram sets (default n=3) capture fuzzy lexical overlap, pro.ducing Jaccard similarity in [0, 1]. Score fusion. Two fusion modes combine the three retriever scores into a single ranking: (1) Weighted: BM25 scores are min-max normalized to [0, 1], then the final score is wv ß svec+wb ßsbm25+wn ßsngram with configurable weights (defaults: 0.7, 0.2, 0.1). (2) Reciprocal P Rank Fusion (RRF): score(d)= 1/(k + rankr(d)), which is parameter-free beyond the r constant k (default 60). session window (every s turns) skip Figure 22: Memory lifecycle. Write path: each conversation turn passes an entropy gate (discarding low-signal turns such as greetings), is sanitized and embedded as an episodic Q:/A: chunk, and stored directlyčno LLM inference required. Every s turns an additional sliding-window chunk is stored. Read path: a heuristic gate skips retrieval for irrelevant queries; qualifying queries run hybrid search (vector + BM25 + n-gram) over the useršs store; retrieved memories pass through a ReflectionGate (safety blocklist, recency decay, deduplication, budget cap) before injection as a separate conversation message. Weighted / RRF wb=0.2,wn=0.1 Figure 23: Hybrid search pipeline. Each candidate chunk is scored along three axesčvector cosine similarity, BM25 keyword relevance, and character n-gram Jaccard overlapčthen combined via weighted fusion or Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF). Backends without native hybrid support fall back to a generic rerank path that fetches 4. top-k candidates from vector search before applying BM25 and n-gram scoring. Backend abstraction. The RAG plugin accesses vector stores through a common VectorStoreBackend interface, decoupling retrieval logic from storage implementation. Six backend types are supported (Figure 24): ź In-memory: development and testing; no external dependencies. ź Milvus Wang et al. (2021): production-grade distributed vector database with native hybrid search support. ź Llama Stack: delegates vector storage and search to a Llama Stack deployment via its OpenAI-compatible /v1/vector_stores API, enabling unified management of LLM serv.ing and retrieval through a single platform. When the Llama Stack instance is configured with the Milvus vector_io provider, the backend supports hybrid search by passing ranking_options: {ranker: ęrrfė} in search requests, combining vector similarity with BM25 keyword matching at the provider level. ź External API : any OpenAI-compatible vector store endpoint. ź MCP: retrieval via Model Context Protocol tool servers. ź OpenAI file search: delegated retrieval through OpenAIšs hosted file search API. Backends that implement native hybrid search (Milvus, Llama Stack with Milvus provider) use their own BM25 and keyword indexes; all other backends fall back to a generic rerank path that fetches an expanded candidate set (4. top-k) from vector search and applies BM25 and n-gram scoring as a post-retrieval reranking step. Score-range awareness. Different retrieval modes produce scores on fundamentally dif.ferent scales: cosine similarity yields values in [0, 1] where a threshold of .0.7 is typical, P while RRF scores follow 1/(k + rank) and typically range from 0.001 to 0.05. Applying a cosine-calibrated threshold to RRF scores would silently discard all results. The backend interface handles this transparently: when hybrid search is active, score-based filtering is bypassed and result volume is controlled solely by the top-k parameter. 13.3 Stateful Conversations (Response API) The system supports the OpenAI Responses API for stateful multi-turn conversations: Conversation chaining. Each response is stored with a unique ID. Subsequent requests reference previous_response_id to reconstruct the full conversation history without re.transmitting the full message sequence. A bidirectional translator converts between the Re.sponse API format and Chat Completions format for backend model invocation, enabling all routing, safety, and caching features to operate identically on both API surfaces. Routing continuity. Stored responses include routing metadata (decision, model selection, signal results), enabling consistent routing across conversation turns and providing context for feedback-driven model selection. State backends. Conversation state is persisted via three backends: (1) in-memory for development; (2) Redis for production deployments requiring distributed state with high availabilityčsupporting both standalone and cluster modes; (3) Milvus for deployments that benefit from semantic retrieval over conversation history. The Redis backend enables horizontal scaling: multiple router replicas share conversation state, and Redis persistence ensures that conversation chains survive pod restarts. 13.4 Integration with Signal-Decision Architecture Both memory and RAG operate as per-decision plugins. Different decisions can activate different RAG configurations (different vector stores, different k values, different chunk strategies, different search modes) or disable retrieval entirely. This enables, for example, a ęresearch assistantė decision that activates RAG with hybrid search over a technical knowl.edge base while a ęcasual chatė decision disables retrieval. 14 Observability Intelligent routing introduces a new observability surface: beyond standard model serving metrics, operators must monitor signal extraction quality, decision matching patterns, plugin effectiveness, and model selection outcomes. 14.1 Metrics Taxonomy We instrument four metric categories using Prometheus Prometheus Authors (2024): Model performance. Per-model request counts, token usage, estimated cost, completion latency, Time-to-First-Token (TTFT), and Time-per-Output-Token (TPOT). These metrics enable real-time cost monitoring and performance regression detection across the model fleet. Routing behavior. Routing modification counts (original model vs. selected model), rea.son codes (which signal types triggered which decisions), and routing latency (overhead of the routing pipeline itself). These metrics answer the question: how is the router changing traffic patterns? Signal and decision quality. Per-signal-type extraction counts and match rates, per-decision match frequencies and confidence distributions, and per-plugin execution counts and outcomes. These metrics enable calibration: if a signal type rarely matches, its threshold may need adjustment; if a decision matches too broadly, its conditions may be under.specified. Safety and cache effectiveness. PII violation rates by entity type, jailbreak detection rates, hallucination detection latency, cache hit rates, and cache operation latency. These metrics quantify the value delivered by the plugin chain. 14.2 Distributed Tracing We implement OpenTelemetry OpenTelemetry Authors (2024) tracing with a hierarchical span model: ź Root span: Covers the full request lifecycle from receipt to response. ź Signal spans: Individual spans for each signal type evaluation, capturing latency and results. ź Decision span: Decision evaluation with the matched decision and confidence. ź Plugin spans: Per-plugin execution with type-specific attributes (cache hit/miss, PII types detected, hallucination spans found). ź Upstream span: Backend model invocation, with W3C Trace Context propagation enabling end-to-end tracing through vLLM Kwon et al. (2023) and other inference frame.works. This span hierarchy enables operators to diagnose routing latency (ęwhich signal is slow?ė), understand routing decisions (ęwhy was this query routed to model X?ė), and correlate routing behavior with model serving performance. 15 Deployment We describe the deployment architecture that enables the routing system to operate from single-node development to production Kubernetes The Kubernetes Authors (2024) clusters. 15.1 Deployment Modes Local development. A single command (pip install vllm-sr && vllm-sr serve) bootstraps the complete stack: router, Envoy proxy, and dashboard. This lowers the barrier to experimentation with routing configurations. Kubernetes: Standalone mode. Envoy runs as a sidecar container alongside the router in the same pod. The ExtProc filter connects via localhost gRPC. Deployed via Helm charts with configurable replicas, resource limits, cache backends, and autoscaling. Kubernetes: Gateway mode. The router runs as an independent service behind an exist.ing Istio or Envoy Gateway deployment, referenced via the gatewayšs ExtProc configuration. This mode shares the gateway infrastructure across multiple services. 15.2 Kubernetes Operator A custom operator manages the lifecycle of routing deployments through a SemanticRouter Custom Resource Definition (CRD). The reconciliation loop manages: service accounts, configuration (ConfigMap or CRD-sourced), persistent storage, gateway/route resources, Envoy configuration, deployments, services, and horizontal pod autoscalers. Backend discovery. The operator discovers model backends via three mechanisms: KServe InferenceService resources (for managed model serving), label-based Llama Stack discovery, and direct Kubernetes Service references. 15.3 Dashboard A web console (React frontend, Go backend) provides: configuration editing with live vali.dation, topology visualization of routing flows, an interactive playground for testing routing decisions, embedded Grafana/Prometheus/Jaeger dashboards for monitoring and tracing, and an evaluation framework for benchmarking routing quality. 16 Evaluation We evaluate the routing system across four dimensions: signal extraction efficiency, GPU-accelerated long-context inference, LoRA multi-task scaling, and end-to-end routing cor.rectness. 16.1 Signal Extraction Latency Table 4 reports median and p99 latencies for each signal type on an NVIDIA A100 GPU with ModernBERT base model. Table 4: Signal extraction latency by type Signal Type  Median  p99  Requires ML  Keyword Context  < 0.1 ms < 0.1 ms  < 0.5 ms < 0.5 ms  No No  Language Authorization  < 0.5 ms < 0.1 ms  < 1 ms < 0.5 ms  No No  Embedding Domain  15 ms 60 ms  45 ms 120 ms  Yes Yes  Fact-check  55 ms  110 ms  Yes  Modality Feedback  50 ms 55 ms  100 ms 115 ms  Yes Yes  Complexity Preference  50 ms 55 ms  105 ms 110 ms  Yes Yes  Heuristic signals complete in sub-millisecond time, while ML signals range from 15ą120ms. With parallel evaluation, the wall-clock time is dominated by the slowest active signal (.120ms for domain classification) rather than the sum. 16.2 GPU-Accelerated Inference with SDPA To accelerate ML signal extraction on long prompts, we re-export the mmBERT-32K clas.sifiers from PyTorch using Scaled Dot-Product Attention (SDPA), apply ONNX Runtime graph optimization (Gelu/LayerNorm fusion), and convert weights to FP16. Table 5 reports single-session inference latency on an AMD Instinct MI300X using the ROCm execution provider, compared against CPU (x86-64, ORT default provider). Table 5: mmBERT-32K inference latency: CPU (FP32) vs. GPU SDPA (FP16), single session, batch size 1 Seq. Length CPU (ms) GPU (ms) Speedup 512 120 6.0 20. 1,024 263 7.7 34. 2,048 809 14.1 57. 4,096 2,664 57.6 46. 8,192 9,656 237 41. The SDPA re-export reduces the ONNX graph from 2,902 to 1,342 operators; FP16 conver.sion halves model size from 1.2GB to 587MB. At 8K tokens, single-session GPU inference completes in 237msča 41. speedup over CPU. However, when all three classifiers are loaded concurrently (the operational configuration), SDPAšs O(n2) memory footprint causes OOM beyond .4K tokens. The next section addresses this limitation with flash attention. 16.3 Flash Attention via Composable Kernel Standard SDPA materializes the full O(n2) attention mask and QK. matrix, causing out-of.memory (OOM) failures beyond .4,096 tokens when three classifiers are loaded concurrently. We replace SDPA attention subgraphs with a custom ONNX Runtime operator backed by AMDšs Composable Kernel (CK) tiled flash attention, which computes attention in O(n) working memory. For ModernBERTšs local-attention layers (sliding window of 128), the CK kernelšs native window_size parameters eliminate the dense mask entirely; a lightweight 1-D padding bias [B, 1, 1,S] replaces the [1, 1, S, S] broadcast mask for all layers. Table 6 compares SDPA and FA at concurrency 1. Table 7 then varies the number of con.current requests to measure throughput under load. All measurements are median latency on an AMD Instinct MI300X with three classifiers loaded concurrently (domain, jailbreak, PII evaluated in parallel per request). Table 6: End-to-end classification latency: SDPA vs. CK Flash Attention (FP16, ROCm EP, 3 classifiers in parallel, concurrency 1, MI300X) Seq. Length  SDPA (ms)  FA (ms)  Speedup  512  19  19  1.0.  1,024 2,048 4,096 8,192 16,384 32,768  26 51 167 OOM OOM OOM  23 32 51 105 259 756  1.1. 1.6. 3.3. č č č  At concurrency 1 (Table 6), FA matches SDPA at short sequences and is 3.3. faster at 4K tokens; beyond 4K tokens SDPA cannot allocate the 1.5GB attention mask when three 49 Table 7: CK Flash Attention latency under concurrent load (median / p95 in ms, MI300X) C=1 C=10 C=20 Seq. Len. med p95 med p95 med p95 512 19 19 77 123 142 238 1,024 23 24 104 167 189 325 2,048 32 32 141 234 275 456 4,096 51 52 281 998 521 847 8,192 105 105 601 873 1,058 1,732 16,384 259 260 1,567 2,426 3,089 4,817 32,768 756 763 5,406 7,503 9,872 14,862 models share the GPU. Under concurrent load (Table 7), FA scales gracefully: 20 simul.taneous 4K-token requests complete with a median of 521ms (p95 847ms), and even 20 concurrent 32K-token requests complete without OOMča regime entirely inaccessible to SDPA. Latency scales approximately linearly with concurrency, confirming that the GPU compute pipeline serializes requests rather than experiencing pathological queuing. 16.4 LoRA Memory Efficiency Table 8 shows the memory advantage of serving classifiers via LoRA adapters versus inde.pendent fine-tuned models. Table 8: Model memory: independent fine-tuned models vs. LoRA adapters (ModernBERT base, 150M params) Tasks (n)  Independent (MB)  LoRA (MB)  1  573  573  3  1,719  574  6  3,438  575  At n =6, the LoRA architecture requires .6. less model memory (one base model + six .0.2MB adapters vs. six full model copies). Each task still requires its own forward pass; latency reduction comes from parallel execution of classifiers rather than from LoRA itself (Section 9). 16.5 Decision Engine Overhead Decision evaluation adds negligible latency: < 0.1 ms for 10 decisions with 3 conditions each; < 0.5 ms for 100 decisions with 5 conditions each. This confirms that the O(M ß Lmax) complexity is dominated by signal extraction. 16.6 Composable Orchestration Across Deployment Scenarios A key claim of this work is that the same architecture serves diverse deployment scenarios through configuration. Table 9 demonstrates how different signal-decision-plugin composi.tions address different requirements: 16.7 End-to-End Routing Correctness The end-to-end test framework validates routing behavior across eight scenario profiles: Each profile validates correct model selection, safety enforcement (jailbreak blocked, PII de.tected), cache behavior (hits after similar queries), multi-provider routing (correct endpoint resolution and auth injection), and header propagation. Table 9: Composable signal orchestration across deployment scenarios. Each scenario acti.vates a different subset of the thirteen signal types, selection algorithms, and plugin chainsč using the same system binary and architecture. Scenario  Active Signals  Selection  Key Plugins  Privacy. authz, domain, language  Static  Strict PII redaction, no  regulated  (compliant  caching, audit logging  (healthcare)  models  only)  Cost- complexity, embedding,  AutoMix  Aggressive semantic cache,  optimized  keyword  cascade  header mutation for LoRA  (developer  adapter  tool)  Multi-cloud  domain, modality, authz  Latency- Multi-endpoint failover,  enterprise  aware  provider auth factory,  system prompt injection  Multi-turn  embedding, feedback,  Elo with  Responses API state,  assistant  preference  session pin  memory retrieval, RAG  injection  Table 10: End-to-end test profiles Profile  Validated Behavior  Multi-endpoint  Multi-provider routing with weighted distribution and failover across  heterogeneous backends  Multi-provider  Provider-specific auth injection (API key, OAuth2, cloud IAM) via  auth  authorization factory  AuthZ-RBAC  Role-based model access (admin/premium/free tiers) with authz  signal  ML model  KNN, KMeans, SVM, MLP selection accuracy on held-out queries  selection  Keyword  Keyword signal matching with AND/OR/NOR combinators  routing  Embedding  Embedding similarity thresholds and confidence-based decision  routing  selection  RAG +  Context retrieval, injection, and stateful multi-turn via Responses  Responses API  API  Routing  Static, Elo, RouterDC, AutoMix, Hybrid algorithm comparison  strategies  16.8 Semantic Cache Effectiveness At a similarity threshold . =0.92: exact-match queries achieve 100% hit rate with < 5 ms lookup latency; paraphrased queries achieve 60ą80% hit rate depending on paraphrase distance. Cache hits eliminate backend model invocation entirely, reducing per-request cost to embedding computation only. 16.9 Unified MoM Evaluation Framework To validate the robustness of the Mixture of Models (MoM) collection, we implemented a unified evaluation pipeline that benchmarks both merged models and LoRA adapters. The framework standardizes the assessment of heterogeneous model variants across intent classification and PII detection tasks. The evaluation architecture, shown in Figure 25, utilizes the following components: ź Schema Normalization: Inputs from diverse sourcesčincluding MMLU-Pro for intent and Presidio for token classificationčare mapped to a common evaluation schema. ź Comparative Quality Validation: The system computes weighted F1-scores and per-class precision/recall to ensure that the memory efficiency gains reported in Table 8 do not result in significant predictive degradation compared to full-parameter models. ź Parallelized Benchmarking: Large-scale evaluations are executed via ProcessPoolExecutor to minimize wall-clock time. The pipeline incorporates au.tomated OOM recovery and exponential backoff for API-based signal providers to ensure benchmark reliability. Results include p50 and p99 latency profiling to confirm that model orchestration remains within the operational bounds required for real-time routing. 16.10 Open Evaluation Detailed model selection quality comparisons across algorithms, HaluGate detection accu.racy on standard benchmarks (HaluEval, FActScore), and large-scale routing quality evalu.ation are under preparation in collaboration with the RouterArena team. 17 Related Work 17.1 LLM Routing and Model Selection Binary routing. RouteLLM Ong et al. (2024) pioneered preference-data-driven routing between a strong and weak model, training BERT, MLP, and causal LLM classifiers to estimate query difficulty. Our work extends this to multi-model, multi-signal routing with per-decision plugin chains. Contrastive selection. RouterDC Chen et al. (2024) learns shared query-model embed.dings via dual contrastive learning. We integrate RouterDC as one of thirteen selection algorithms and extend it with signal-conditioned features (domain category, complexity). Cascading. AutoMix Aggarwal et al. (2023) formulates model cascading as a POMDP with self-verification. We integrate AutoMix within our plugin-aware framework, where safety checks and caching can prevent unnecessary escalation. Benchmarking. RouterBench Hu et al. (2024) proposed a benchmark for multi-LLM routing with hybrid scoring. Our Hybrid selector builds on this approach. RL-based routing. Router-R1 Zhang et al. (2025a) formulates multi-LLM routing as a sequential decision process, using rule-based reward RL for multi-round routing and aggre.gation. GMTRouter Xie et al. (2025) uses graph-based learning for personalized multi-turn interactions. We integrate both within the unified selection interface and extend them with the ReMoM multi-round reasoning strategy. A key distinction of our work is that prior approaches address model selection in isolation, while we embed selection within a composable signal orchestration framework that also handles signal extraction, safety enforcement, caching, context augmentation, and multi-provider routingčenabling the same selection algorithms to serve fundamentally different deployment scenarios through configuration. 17.2 Multi-Provider and Multi-Endpoint Routing Commercial LLM gateway products (OpenRouter, AWS Bedrock, Azure AI Studio) pro.vide multi-provider access but lack the composable signal-driven routing that enables dif.ferentiated policies per routing decision. API management platforms (Kong, Apigee) offer gateway functionality but are not designed for semantic analysis of LLM requests. Our system uniquely combines semantic model selection with multi-provider protocol abstrac.tion, a pluggable authorization factory, and full OpenAI Responses API support for stateful conversations within the same composable framework. 17.3 Mixture-of-Experts vs. Mixture-of-Models Sparse Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) Shazeer et al. (2017); Jiang et al. (2024) routes tokens to specialized sub-networks within a single model architecture. Our system operates at the request level, routing entire requests across different model deploymentsča Mixture-of-Models (MoM) approach. The two paradigms are complementary: our router can route to MoE models as backends. 17.4 LLM Safety Prompt injection defenses range from perplexity filtering and input preprocessing Jain et al. (2023) to fine-tuned safety classifiers Inan et al. (2023). PII detection systems Lison et al. (2021) identify sensitive information using rule-based and ML approaches. Our safety sub.system integrates both within the routing pipeline with per-decision thresholds and policies, using LoRA adapters for memory-efficient multi-task classification. 17.5 Hallucination Detection SelfCheckGPT Manakul et al. (2023) detects hallucinations via multi-sample consistency. FActScore Min et al. (2023) evaluates factual precision at the atomic fact level. HaluGate differs in three respects: (1) a gating Sentinel that skips verification for non-factual queries; (2) token-level span identification rather than sentence-level scoring; (3) NLI-based expla.nation distinguishing contradiction from neutral unsupported content. 17.6 Semantic Caching and RAG Semantic caching for LLMs uses embedding similarity to match incoming queries against previously seen requests, avoiding redundant model invocations. Our cache extends this with per-decision policies, multiple backends, and integration with the safety pipeline (cache lookups occur after safety checks but before model invocation). RAG integration Lewis et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2021) augments responses with retrieved context; our contribution is embedding RAG as a per-decision plugin within the routing framework. 18 Conclusion We have presented vLLM Semantic Router, a signal-driven decision routing system for Mixture-of-Modality model deployments. The central contribution is composable signal orchestration: the three-layer architecturečsignal extraction, Boolean decision evalua.tion, per-decision plugin chainsčenables diverse deployment scenarios to be expressed as different configurations over the same framework, without code changes. Privacy-regulated deployments activate authz and PII signals with strict filtering plugins; cost-optimized deployments enable cascading selection with aggressive semantic caching; multi-cloud enterprises configure weighted multi-endpoint routing with provider-specific auth injection. All use the same signal-decision-plugin machinery, composed differently. Within this framework, semantic model selection analyzes each requestšs content through thirteen algorithmsčspanning rating-based, contrastive, cascading, classical ML, reinforce.ment learning, and latency-aware familiesčto find the most cost-effective model while re.specting per-decision privacy and safety constraints. The integration of full OpenAI Re.sponses API support enables stateful multi-turn routing with conversation-consistent model assignment; multi-endpoint and multi-provider routing abstracts over hetero.geneous backends (vLLM, OpenAI, Anthropic, Azure, Bedrock, Gemini, Vertex AI) with transparent protocol translation; and the pluggable authorization factory supports di.verse auth mechanisms across providers without coupling auth logic to routing decisions. Additional technical contributions include: (1) the LoRA-based multi-task classification architecture that serves n classifiers from a single base model, reducing aggregate model memory by .n.; (2) HaluGatešs gated three-stage hallucination detection pipeline that reduces average detection cost by .50% through sentinel-based filtering; and (3) Rust-native MLinferencebindings(Candle, Linfa,ONNXRuntime)that achieve sub-10ms signal extraction latency. The system has been validated in production with over 600 merged contributions from 50+ engineers and is deployed as an Envoy ExtProc with Kubernetes operator support. 18.1 Future Directions Several research directions emerge from this work: Learned decision policies. Replacing hand-crafted Boolean rules with learned routing policies (e.g., neural routing networks trained on production traffic) could improve routing quality while maintaining interpretability through attention-based explanation. Differentiable entropy-folding policies. A natural extension of the layered entropy-folding view is to relax symbolic priority gates into trainable soft gates while preserving explicit policy constraints, enabling gradient-based optimization of control depth with au.ditable safety boundaries. Adaptive cost optimization. Online learning approaches that continuously adapt model and provider selection based on real-time cost signals, latency measurements, and user feedbackčextending the current offline-trained ML selectors to fully adaptive cost-quality optimization. Contrastive preference routing. The contrastive embedding method used for complex.ity classification generalizes to user preference learning: a contrastive preference classifier scores queries against exemplar sets representing different user preference profiles, enabling personalized model selection without per-user fine-tuning. Cross-provider consistency. Techniques for ensuring consistent behavior when rout.ing the same conversation across different providers, addressing differences in instruction following, safety behavior, and output formatting. Multi-turn safety. Extending safety enforcement from single-turn to multi-turn con.versations, detecting adversarial patterns that span multiple interaction rounds. Pre.liminary work applies the contrastive embedding approachčalready used for complexity classificationčto multi-turn jailbreak detection: each user turn is scored against known-benign and known-adversarial exemplar sets, and accumulated turn-level signals are fused to detect gradual prompt escalation that evades single-turn classifiers. Federated signal orchestration. Extending composable signal orchestration to feder.ated deployments where signals from multiple routing instances are aggregated for global optimization. Agent-based policy synthesis. The DSL configuration that specifies routing policies can be viewed as a program in a domain-specific language with a formally complete instruc.tion set (Section 6.8). This reframes router configuration as a program synthesis problem: coding agents (LLMs fine-tuned for code generation) can translate natural-language rout.ing specifications into valid DSL configurations, with routing quality feedback enabling RL-based optimization of the synthesis policy. Preliminary experiments suggest that this meta-learning approachčlearning to write routing policies rather than to make individ.ual routing decisionsčcan significantly reduce configuration effort while maintaining the interpretability and verifiability of symbolic decision rules. Multi-protocol adapter abstraction. The current system is tightly coupled to Envoyšs External Processor protocol. A multi-protocol adapter architecture would abstract the routing engine from protocol-specific code, enabling support for HTTP REST, native gRPC, Nginx/OpenResty, and custom protocols through thin translation layers. This would also enable abstraction of backend proxying (currently Envoy-specific), external authorization mechanisms, and traffic management policies, making the routing engine truly protocol-agnostic and deployable in serverless, edge, and non-Envoy environments. Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge the contributors who contributed to the project. We thank the Hugging Face Candle team for collaboration on the Candle inference runtime, and the Envoy community for the ExtProc filter. AMD has sponsored the project with resources and infrastructure as well as the vLLM project for the development of the project. AI.assisted tools were used during the writing and proofreading of this paper. The project is open-source at https://github.com/vllm-project/semantic-router. References Karl Johan üstrÜm and Richard M. Murray. Feedback Systems: An Introduction for Scien.tists and Engineers. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2008. Pranjal Aggarwal, Aman Madaan, Ankit Anand, Srividya Pranavi Potharaju, Swaroop Mishra, Pei Zhou, Aditya Gupta, Dheeraj Rajagopal, Karthik Kappaganthu, Yiming Yang, Shyam Upadhyay, Manaal Faruqui, and Mausam. AutoMix: Automatically mixing language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12963, 2023. Richard E. Bellman and Lotfi A. Zadeh. Decision-making in a fuzzy environment. Manage.ment Science, 17(4):Bą141ąBą164, 1970. Robert K. Brayton, Gary D. Hachtel, Curtis T. McMullen, and Alberto L. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli. Logic Minimization Algorithms for VLSI Synthesis. Kluwer Academic Pub.lishers, Boston, MA, 1984. Shuhao Chen, Weisen Jiang, Baijiong Lin, James T. Kwok, and Yu Zhang. RouterDC: Query-based router by dual contrastive learning for assembling large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.19886, 2024. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre.training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2019. Envoy Proxy Authors. Envoy external processing filter, 2024a. URL https: //www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/http/http_filters/ ext_proc_filter. Envoy Proxy Authors. Envoy proxy: An open source edge and service proxy, 2024b. URL https://www.envoyproxy.io/. Harvey Fleisher and Lester I. Maissel. An introduction to array logic. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 19(2):98ą109, 1975. Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685, 2022. Qitian Jason Hu, Jacob Bieker, Xiuyu Li, Nan Jiang, Benjamin Keigwin, Gaurav Ranganath, Kurt Keutzer, and Shriyash Kaustubh Upadhyay. RouterBench: A benchmark for multi-LLM routing system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12031, 2024. Hugging Face. Candle: Minimalist ML framework for Rust, 2024. URL https://github. com/huggingface/candle. Edward V. Huntington. Sets of independent postulates for the algebra of logic. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 5(3):288ą309, 1904. Hakan Inan, Kartikeya Upasani, Jianfeng Chi, Rashi Rungta, Krithika Iyer, Yuning Mao, Michael Tontchev, Qing Hu, Brian Fuller, Davide Testuggine, and Madian Khabsa. Llama Guard: LLM-based input-output safeguard for human-AI conversations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06674, 2023. Neel Jain, Avi Schwarzschild, Yuxin Wen, Gowthami Somepalli, John Kirchenbauer, Ping yeh Chiang, Micah Goldblum, Aniruddha Saha, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Base.line defenses for adversarial attacks against aligned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00614, 2023. Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, et al. Mixtral of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088, 2024. Aditya Kusupati, Gantavya Bhatt, Aniket Rege, Matthew Wallingford, Aditya Sinha, Vivek Ramanujan, William Howard-Snyder, Kaifeng Chen, Sham Kakade, Prateek Jain, and Ali Farhadi. Matryoshka representation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13147, 2022. Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Sicheng Zuo, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP), 2023. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich K¤ttler, Mike Lewis, Wen tau Yih, Tim RocktŖschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.11401, 2020. Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E. Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on World Wide Web, pp. 661ą670. ACM, 2010. Linfa Contributors. Linfa: A Rust machine learning framework, 2024. URL https:// github.com/rust-ml/linfa. Pierre Lison, IldikŚ Pilćn, David Sćnchez, Montserrat Batet, and Lilja »vrelid. Anonymisa.tion models for text data: State of the art, challenges and future directions. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 4188ą4203, 2021. Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark J.F.„ Gales. SelfCheckGPT: Zero-resource black-box hallucination detection for generative large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08896, 2023. Sourab Mangrulkar, Sylvain Gugger, Lysandre Debut, Younes Belkada, Sayak Paul, and Benjamin Bossan. PEFT: State-of-the-art parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods. In Hugging Face, 2022. URL https://github.com/huggingface/peft. Microsoft. ONNX Runtime: Cross-platform, high performance ML inferencing and training accelerator, 2024. URL https://onnxruntime.ai/. Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen tau Yih, Pang Wei Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. FActScore: Fine-grained atomic eval.uation of factual precision in long form text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14251, 2023. Isaac Ong, Amjad Almahairi, Vincent Wu, Wei-Lin Chiang, Tianhao Wu, Joseph E. Gon.zalez, M Waleed Kadous, and Ion Stoica. RouteLLM: Learning to route LLMs with preference data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18665, 2024. OpenTelemetry Authors. OpenTelemetry: An observability framework for cloud-native software, 2024. URL https://opentelemetry.io/. Bowen Peng, Eric Alcaide, Quentin Anthony, Amir Albalak, Samuel Arcadinho, Stella Bi.derman, Huanqi Cao, Xin Cheng, Matteo Chung, Matteo Grella, et al. YaRN: Efficient context window extension of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00071, 2023. Prometheus Authors. Prometheus: From metrics to insight, 2024. URL https:// prometheus.io/. Jorma Rissanen. Modeling by shortest data description. Automatica, 14(5):465ą471, 1978. Ronald L. Rivest. Learning decision lists. Machine Learning, 2(3):229ą246, 1987. Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Online learning and online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 4(2):107ą194, 2012. Claude E. Shannon. A symbolic analysis of relay and switching circuits. Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 57(12):713ą723, 1938. Claude E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Technical Journal, 27(3):379ą423, 1948. Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hin.ton, and Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of.experts layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538, 2017. The Kubernetes Authors. Kubernetes: Production-grade container orchestration, 2024. URL https://kubernetes.io/. Alec Thomas. Participle: A parser library for Go. https://github.com/alecthomas/ participle, 2024. Accessed: 2025-01-15. William R. Thompson. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of the evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 25(3/4):285ą294, 1933. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, .ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017. Jianguo Wang, Xiaomeng Yi, Rentong Guo, Hai Jin, Peng Xu, Shengjun Li, Xiangyu Wang, Xiangzhou Guo, Chengming Li, Xiaohai Xu, et al. Milvus: A purpose-built vector data management system. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), 2021. Benjamin Warner, Antoine Chaffin, Benjamin Clavie, Orion Weller, Oskar Hallstrom, Said Taghadouini, Alexis Gallagher, Raja Biswas, Faisal Ladhak, Tom Aarsen, Nathan Cooper, Griffin Adams, Jeremy Howard, and Iacopo Poli. Smarter, better, faster, longer: A modern bidirectional encoder for fast, memory efficient, and long context finetuning and inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.13663, 2024. Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R. Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sentence understanding through inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.05426, 2018. Encheng Xie, Yihang Sun, Tao Feng, and Jiaxuan You. GMTRouter: Personalized LLM router over multi-turn user interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.08590, 2025. Lotfi A. Zadeh. Fuzzy sets. Information and Control, 8(3):338ą353, 1965. Haozhen Zhang, Tao Feng, and Jiaxuan You. Router-R1: Teaching LLMs multi-round routing and aggregation via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09033, 2025a. Tianjun Zhang, Yangjun Ruan, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. PaCoRe: Parallel cooperative reasoning with LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.05593, 2025b. 